




                              Book III

                                 1



  THE question which is the more desirable, or the better, of two or

more things, should be examined upon the following lines: only first

of all it must be clearly laid down that the inquiry we are making

concerns not things that are widely divergent and that exhibit great

differences from one another (for nobody raises any doubt whether

happiness or wealth is more desirable), but things that are nearly

related and about which we commonly discuss for which of the two we

ought rather to vote, because we do not see any advantage on either

side as compared with the other. Clearly, in such cases if we can show

a single advantage, or more than one, our judgement will record our

assent that whichever side happens to have the advantage is the more

desirable.

  First, then, that which is more lasting or secure is more

desirable than that which is less so: and so is that which is more

likely to be chosen by the prudent or by the good man or by the

right law, or by men who are good in any particular line, when they

make their choice as such, or by the experts in regard to any

particular class of things; i.e. either whatever most of them or

what all of them would choose; e.g. in medicine or in carpentry

those things are more desirable which most, or all, doctors would

choose; or, in general, whatever most men or all men or all things

would choose, e.g. the good: for everything aims at the good. You

should direct the argument you intend to employ to whatever purpose

you require. Of what is 'better' or 'more desirable' the absolute

standard is the verdict of the better science, though relatively to

a given individual the standard may be his own particular science.

  In the second place, that which is known as 'an x' is more desirable

than that which does not come within the genus 'x'-e.g. justice than a

just man; for the former falls within the genus 'good', whereas the

other does not, and the former is called 'a good', whereas the

latter is not: for nothing which does not happen to belong to the

genus in question is called by the generic name; e.g. a 'white man' is

not 'a colour'. Likewise also in other cases.

  Also, that which is desired for itself is more desirable than that

which is desired for something else; e.g. health is more desirable

than gymnastics: for the former is desired for itself, the latter

for something else. Also, that which is desirable in itself is more

desirable than what is desirable per accidens; e.g. justice in our

friends than justice in our enemies: for the former is desirable in

itself, the latter per accidens: for we desire that our enemies should

be just per accidens, in order that they may do us no harm. This

last principle is the same as the one that precedes it, with, however,

a different turn of expression. For we desire justice in our friends

for itself, even though it will make no difference to us, and even

though they be in India; whereas in our enemies we desire it for

something else, in order that they may do us no harm.

  Also, that which is in itself the cause of good is more desirable

than what is so per accidens, e.g. virtue than luck (for the former in

itself, and the latter per accidens, the cause of good things), and so

in other cases of the same kind. Likewise also in the case of the

contrary; for what is in itself the cause of evil is more

objectionable than what is so per accidens, e.g. vice and chance:

for the one is bad in itself, whereas chance is so per accidens.

  Also, what is good absolutely is more desirable than what is good

for a particular person, e.g. recovery of health than a surgical

operation; for the former is good absolutely, the latter only for a

particular person, viz. the man who needs an operation. So too what is

good by nature is more desirable than the good that is not so by

nature, e.g. justice than the just man; for the one is good by nature,

whereas in the other case the goodness is acquired. Also the attribute

is more desirable which belongs to the better and more honourable

subject, e.g. to a god rather than to a man, and to the soul rather

than to the body. So too the property of the better thing is better

than the property of the worse; e.g. the property of God than the

property of man: for whereas in respect of what is common in both of

them they do not differ at all from each other, in respect of their

properties the one surpasses the other. Also that is better which is

inherent in things better or prior or more honourable: thus (e.g.)

health is better than strength and beauty: for the former is

inherent in the moist and the dry, and the hot and the cold, in fact

in all the primary constituents of an animal, whereas the others are

inherent in what is secondary, strength being a feature of the

sinews and bones, while beauty is generally supposed to consist in a

certain symmetry of the limbs. Also the end is generally supposed to

be more desirable than the means, and of two means, that which lies

nearer the end. In general, too, a means directed towards the end of

life is more desirable than a means to anything else, e.g. that

which contributes to happiness than that which contributes to

prudence. Also the competent is more desirable than the incompetent.

Moreover, of two productive agents that one is more desirable whose

end is better; while between a productive agent and an end we can

decide by a proportional sum whenever the excess of the one end over

the other is greater than that of the latter over its own productive

means: e.g. supposing the excess of happiness over health to be

greater than that of health over what produces health, then what

produces happiness is better than health. For what produces

happiness exceeds what produces health just as much as happiness

exceeds health. But health exceeds what produces health by a smaller

amount; ergo, the excess of what produces happiness over what produces

health is greater than that of health over what produces health.

Clearly, therefore, what produces happiness is more desirable than

health: for it exceeds the same standard by a greater amount.

Moreover, what is in itself nobler and more precious and

praiseworthy is more desirable than what is less so, e.g. friendship

than wealth, and justice than strength. For the former belong in

themselves to the class of things precious and praiseworthy, while the

latter do so not in themselves but for something else: for no one

prizes wealth for itself but always for something else, whereas we

prize friendship for itself, even though nothing else is likely to

come to us from it.



                                 2



  Moreover, whenever two things are very much like one another, and we

cannot see any superiority in the one over the other of them, we

should look at them from the standpoint of their consequences. For the

one which is followed by the greater good is the more desirable: or,

if the consequences be evil, that is more desirable which is

followed by the less evil. For though both may be desirable, yet there

may possibly be some unpleasant consequence involved to turn the

scale. Our survey from the point of view of consequences lies in two

directions, for there are prior consequences and later consequences:

e.g. if a man learns, it follows that he was ignorant before and knows

afterwards. As a rule, the later consequence is the better to

consider. You should take, therefore, whichever of the consequences

suits your purpose.

  Moreover, a greater number of good things is more desirable than a

smaller, either absolutely or when the one is included in the other,

viz. the smaller number in the greater. An objection may be raised

suppose in some particular case the one is valued for the sake of

the other; for then the two together are not more desirable than the

one; e.g. recovery of health and health, than health alone, inasmuch

as we desire recovery of health for the sake of health. Also it is

quite possible for what is not good, together with what is, to be more

desirable than a greater number of good things, e.g. the combination

of happiness and something else which is not good may be more

desirable than the combination of justice and courage. Also, the

same things are more valuable if accompanied than if unaccompanied

by pleasure, and likewise when free from pain than when attended

with pain.

  Also, everything is more desirable at the season when it is of

greater consequence; e.g. freedom from pain in old age more than in

youth: for it is of greater consequence in old age. On the same

principle also, prudence is more desirable in old age; for no man

chooses the young to guide him, because he does not expect them to

be prudent. With courage, the converse is the case, for it is in youth

that the active exercise of courage is more imperatively required.

Likewise also with temperance; for the young are more troubled by

their passions than are their elders.

  Also, that is more desirable which is more useful at every season or

at most seasons, e.g. justice and temperance rather than courage:

for they are always useful, while courage is only useful at times.

Also, that one of two things which if all possess, we do not need

the other thing, is more desirable than that which all may possess and

still we want the other one as well. Take the case of justice and

courage; if everybody were just, there would be no use for courage,

whereas all might be courageous, and still justice would be of use.

  Moreover, judge by the destructions and losses and generations and

acquisitions and contraries of things: for things whose destruction is

more objectionable are themselves more desirable. Likewise also with

the losses and contraries of things; for a thing whose loss or whose

contrary is more objectionable is itself more desirable. With the

generations or acquisitions of things the opposite is the case: for

things whose acquisition or generation is more desirable are

themselves also desirable. Another commonplace rule is that what is

nearer to the good is better and more desirable, i.e. what more nearly

resembles the good: thus justice is better than a just man. Also, that

which is more like than another thing to something better than itself,

as e.g. some say that Ajax was a better man than Odysseus because he

was more like Achilles. An objection may be raised to this that it

is not true: for it is quite possible that Ajax did not resemble

Achilles more nearly than Odysseus in the points which made Achilles

the best of them, and that Odysseus was a good man, though unlike

Achilles. Look also to see whether the resemblance be that of a

caricature, like the resemblance of a monkey to a man, whereas a horse

bears none: for the monkey is not the more handsome creature,

despite its nearer resemblance to a man. Again, in the case of two

things, if one is more like the better thing while another is more

like the worse, then that is likely to be better which is more like

the better. This too, however, admits of an objection: for quite

possibly the one only slightly resembles the better, while the other

strongly resembles the worse, e.g. supposing the resemblance of Ajax

to Achilles to be slight, while that of Odysseus to Nestor is

strong. Also it may be that the one which is like the better type

shows a degrading likeness, whereas the one which is like the worse

type improves upon it: witness the likeness of a horse to a donkey,

and that of a monkey to a man.

  Another rule is that the more conspicuous good is more desirable

than the less conspicuous, and the more difficult than the easier: for

we appreciate better the possession of things that cannot be easily

acquired. Also the more personal possession is more desirable than the

more widely shared. Also, that which is more free from connexion

with evil: for what is not attended by any unpleasantness is more

desirable than what is so attended.

  Moreover, if A be without qualification better than B, then also the

best of the members of A is better than the best of the members of

B; e.g. if Man be better than Horse, then also the best man is

better than the best horse. Also, if the best in A be better than

the best in B, then also A is better than B without qualification;

e.g. if the best man be better than the best horse, then also Man is

better than Horse without qualification.

  Moreover, things which our friends can share are more desirable than

those they cannot. Also, things which we like rather to do to our

friend are more desirable than those we like to do to the man in the

street, e.g. just dealing and the doing of good rather than the

semblance of them: for we would rather really do good to our friends

than seem to do so, whereas towards the man in the street the converse

is the case.

  Also, superfluities are better than necessities, and are sometimes

more desirable as well: for the good life is better than mere life,

and good life is a superfluity, whereas mere life itself is a

necessity. Sometimes, though, what is better is not also more

desirable: for there is no necessity that because it is better it

should also be more desirable: at least to be a philosopher is

better than to make money, but it is not more desirable for a man

who lacks the necessities of life. The expression 'superfluity'

applies whenever a man possesses the necessities of life and sets to

work to secure as well other noble acquisitions. Roughly speaking,

perhaps, necessities are more desirable, while superfluities are

better.

  Also, what cannot be got from another is more desirable than what

can be got from another as well, as (e.g.) is the case of justice

compared with courage. Also, A is more desirable if A is desirable

without B, but not B without A: power (e.g.) is not desirable

without prudence, but prudence is desirable without power. Also, if of

two things we repudiate the one in order to be thought to possess

the other, then that one is more desirable which we wish to be thought

to possess; thus (e.g.) we repudiate the love of hard work in order

that people may think us geniuses.

  Moreover, that is more desirable in whose absence it is less

blameworthy for people to be vexed; and that is more desirable in

whose absence it is more blameworthy for a man not to be vexed.



                                 3



  Moreover, of things that belong to the same species one which

possesses the peculiar virtue of the species is more desirable than

one which does not. If both possess it, then the one which possesses

it in a greater degree is more desirable.

  Moreover, if one thing makes good whatever it touches, while another

does not, the former is more desirable, just as also what makes things

warm is warmer than what does not. If both do so, then that one is

more desirable which does so in a greater degree, or if it render good

the better and more important object-if (e.g.), the one makes good the

soul, and the other the body.

  Moreover, judge things by their inflexions and uses and actions

and works, and judge these by them: for they go with each other:

e.g. if 'justly' means something more desirable than 'courageously',

then also justice means something more desirable than courage; and

if justice be more desirable than courage, then also 'justly' means

something more desirable than 'courageously'. Similarly also in the

other cases.

  Moreover, if one thing exceeds while the other falls short of the

same standard of good, the one which exceeds is the more desirable; or

if the one exceeds an even higher standard. Nay more, if there be

two things both preferable to something, the one which is more

highly preferable to it is more desirable than the less highly

preferable. Moreover, when the excess of a thing is more desirable

than the excess of something else, that thing is itself also more

desirable than the other, as (e.g.) friendship than money: for an

excess of friendship is more desirable than an excess of money. So

also that of which a man would rather that it were his by his own

doing is more desirable than what he would rather get by another's

doing, e.g. friends than money. Moreover, judge by means of an

addition, and see if the addition of A to the same thing as B makes

the whole more desirable than does the addition of B. You must,

however, beware of adducing a case in which the common term uses, or

in some other way helps the case of, one of the things added to it,

but not the other, as (e.g.) if you took a saw and a sickle in

combination with the art of carpentry: for in the combination the

saw is a more desirable thing, but it is not a more desirable thing

without qualification. Again, a thing is more desirable if, when added

to a lesser good, it makes the whole greater good. Likewise, also, you

should judge by means of subtraction: for the thing upon whose

subtraction the remainder is a lesser good may be taken to be a

greater good, whichever it be whose subtraction makes the remainder

a lesser good.

  Also, if one thing be desirable for itself, and the other for the

look of it, the former is more desirable, as (e.g.) health than

beauty. A thing is defined as being desired for the look of it if,

supposing no one knew of it, you would not care to have it. Also, it

is more desirable both for itself and for the look of it, while the

other thing is desirable on the one ground alone. Also, whichever is

the more precious for itself, is also better and more desirable. A

thing may be taken to be more precious in itself which we choose

rather for itself, without anything else being likely to come of it.

  Moreover, you should distinguish in how many senses 'desirable' is

used, and with a view to what ends, e.g. expediency or honour or

pleasure. For what is useful for all or most of them may be taken to

be more desirable than what is not useful in like manner. If the

same characters belong to both things you should look and see which

possesses them more markedly, i.e. which of the two is the more

pleasant or more honourable or more expedient. Again, that is more

desirable which serves the better purpose, e.g. that which serves to

promote virtue more than that which serves to promote pleasure.

Likewise also in the case of objectionable things; for that is more

objectionable which stands more in the way of what is desirable,

e.g. disease more than ugliness: for disease is a greater hindrance

both to pleasure and to being good.

  Moreover, argue by showing that the thing in question is in like

measure objectionable and desirable: for a thing of such a character

that a man might well desire and object to it alike is less

desirable than the other which is desirable only.



                                 4



  Comparisons of things together should therefore be conducted in

the manner prescribed. The same commonplace rules are useful also

for showing that anything is simply desirable or objectionable: for we

have only to subtract the excess of one thing over another. For if

what is more precious be more desirable, then also what is precious is

desirable; and if what is more useful be more desirable, then also

what is useful is desirable. Likewise, also, in the case of other

things which admit of comparisons of that kind. For in some cases in

the very course of comparing the things together we at once assert

also that each of them, or the one of them, is desirable, e.g.

whenever we call the one good 'by nature' and the other 'not by

nature': for dearly what is good by nature is desirable.



                                 5



  The commonplace rules relating to comparative degrees and amounts

ought to be taken in the most general possible form: for when so taken

they are likely to be useful in a larger number of instances. It is

possible to render some of the actual rules given above more universal

by a slight alteration of the expression, e.g. that what by nature

exhibits such and such a quality exhibits that quality in a greater

degree than what exhibits it not by nature. Also, if one thing does,

and another does not, impart such and such a quality to that which

possesses it, or to which it belongs, then whichever does impart it is

of that quality in greater degree than the one which does not impart

it; and if both impart it, then that one exhibits it in a greater

degree which imparts it in a greater degree.

  Moreover, if in any character one thing exceeds and another falls

short of the same standard; also, if the one exceeds something which

exceeds a given standard, while the other does not reach that

standard, then clearly the first-named thing exhibits that character

in a greater degree. Moreover, you should judge by means of

addition, and see if A when added to the same thing as B imparts to

the whole such and such a character in a more marked degree than B, or

if, when added to a thing which exhibits that character in a less

degree, it imparts that character to the whole in a greater degree.

Likewise, also, you may judge by means of subtraction: for a thing

upon whose subtraction the remainder exhibits such and such a

character in a less degree, itself exhibits that character in a

greater degree. Also, things exhibit such and such a character in a

greater degree if more free from admixture with their contraries; e.g.

that is whiter which is more free from admixture with black. Moreover,

apart from the rules given above, that has such and such a character

in greater degree which admits in a greater degree of the definition

proper to the given character; e.g. if the definition of 'white' be 'a

colour which pierces the vision', then that is whiter which is in a

greater degree a colour that pierces the vision.



                                 6



  If the question be put in a particular and not in a universal

form, in the first place the universal constructive or destructive

commonplace rules that have been given may all be brought into use.

For in demolishing or establishing a thing universally we also show it

in particular: for if it be true of all, it is true also of some,

and if untrue of all, it is untrue of some. Especially handy and of

general application are the commonplace rules that are drawn from

the opposites and co-ordinates and inflexions of a thing: for public

opinion grants alike the claim that if all pleasure be good, then also

all pain is evil, and the claim that if some pleasure be good, then

also some pain is evil. Moreover, if some form of sensation be not a

capacity, then also some form of failure of sensation is not a failure

of capacity. Also, if the object of conception is in some cases an

object of knowledge, then also some form of conceiving is knowledge.

Again, if what is unjust be in some cases good, then also what is just

is in some cases evil; and if what happens justly is in some cases

evil, then also what happens unjustly is in some cases good. Also,

if what is pleasant is in some cases objectionable, then pleasure is

in some cases an objectionable thing. On the same principle, also,

if what is pleasant is in some cases beneficial, then pleasure is in

some cases a beneficial thing. The case is the same also as regards

the things that destroy, and the processes of generation and

destruction. For if anything that destroys pleasure or knowledge be in

some cases good, then we may take it that pleasure or knowledge is

in some cases an evil thing. Likewise, also, if the destruction of

knowledge be in some cases a good thing or its production an evil

thing, then knowledge will be in some cases an evil thing; e.g. if for

a man to forget his disgraceful conduct be a good thing, and to

remember it be an evil thing, then the knowledge of his disgraceful

conduct may be taken to be an evil thing. The same holds also in other

cases: in all such cases the premiss and the conclusion are equally

likely to be accepted.

  Moreover you should judge by means of greater or smaller or like

degrees: for if some member of another genus exhibit such and such a

character in a more marked degree than your object, while no member of

that genus exhibits that character at all, then you may take it that

neither does the object in question exhibit it; e.g. if some form of

knowledge be good in a greater degree than pleasure, while no form

of knowledge is good, then you may take it that pleasure is not good

either. Also, you should judge by a smaller or like degree in the same

way: for so you will find it possible both to demolish and to

establish a view, except that whereas both are possible by means of

like degrees, by means of a smaller degree it is possible only to

establish, not to overthrow. For if a certain form of capacity be good

in a like degree to knowledge, and a certain form of capacity be good,

then so also is knowledge; while if no form of capacity be good,

then neither is knowledge. If, too, a certain form of capacity be good

in a less degree than knowledge, and a certain form of capacity be

good, then so also is knowledge; but if no form of capacity be good,

there is no necessity that no form of knowledge either should be good.

Clearly, then, it is only possible to establish a view by means of a

less degree.

  Not only by means of another genus can you overthrow a view, but

also by means of the same, if you take the most marked instance of the

character in question; e.g. if it be maintained that some form of

knowledge is good, then, suppose it to be shown that prudence is not

good, neither will any other kind be good, seeing that not even the

kind upon which there is most general agreement is so. Moreover, you

should go to work by means of an hypothesis; you should claim that the

attribute, if it belongs or does not belong in one case, does so in

a like degree in all, e.g. that if the soul of man be immortal, so are

other souls as well, while if this one be not so, neither are the

others. If, then, it be maintained that in some instance the attribute

belongs, you must show that in some instance it does not belong: for

then it will follow, by reason of the hypothesis, that it does not

belong to any instance at all. If, on the other hand, it be maintained

that it does not belong in some instance, you must show that it does

belong in some instance, for in this way it will follow that it

belongs to all instances. It is clear that the maker of the hypothesis

universalizes the question, whereas it was stated in a particular

form: for he claims that the maker of a particular admission should

make a universal admission, inasmuch as he claims that if the

attribute belongs in one instance, it belongs also in all instances

alike.

  If the problem be indefinite, it is possible to overthrow a

statement in only one way; e.g. if a man has asserted that pleasure is

good or is not good, without any further definition. For if he meant

that a particular pleasure is good, you must show universally that

no pleasure is good, if the proposition in question is to be

demolished. And likewise, also, if he meant that some particular

pleasure is not good you must show universally that all pleasure is

good: it is impossible to demolish it in any other way. For if we show

that some particular pleasure is not good or is good, the

proposition in question is not yet demolished. It is clear, then, that

it is possible to demolish an indefinite statement in one way only,

whereas it can be established in two ways: for whether we show

universally that all pleasure is good, or whether we show that a

particular pleasure is good, the proposition in question will have

been proved. Likewise, also, supposing we are required to argue that

some particular pleasure is not good, if we show that no pleasure is

good or that a particular pleasure is not good, we shall have produced

an argument in both ways, both universally and in particular, to

show that some particular pleasure is not good. If, on the other hand,

the statement made be definite, it will be possible to demolish it

in two ways; e.g. if it be maintained that it is an attribute of

some particular pleasure to be good, while of some it is not: for

whether it be shown that all pleasure, or that no pleasure, is good,

the proposition in question will have been demolished. If, however, he

has stated that only one single pleasure is good, it is possible to

demolish it in three ways: for by showing that all pleasure, or that

no pleasure, or that more than one pleasure, is good, we shall have

demolished the statement in question. If the statement be made still

more definite, e.g. that prudence alone of the virtues is knowledge,

there are four ways of demolishing it: for if it be shown that all

virtue is knowledge, or that no virtue is so, or that some other

virtue (e.g. justice) is so, or that prudence itself is not knowledge,

the proposition in question will have been demolished.

  It is useful also to take a look at individual instances, in cases

where some attribute has been said to belong or not to belong, as in

the case of universal questions. Moreover, you should take a glance

among genera, dividing them by their species until you come to those

that are not further divisible, as has been said before:' for

whether the attribute is found to belong in all cases or in none,

you should, after adducing several instances, claim that he should

either admit your point universally, or else bring an objection

showing in what case it does not hold. Moreover, in cases where it

is possible to make the accident definite either specifically or

numerically, you should look and see whether perhaps none of them

belongs, showing e.g. that time is not moved, nor yet a movement, by

enumerating how many species there are of movement: for if none of

these belong to time, clearly it does not move, nor yet is a movement.

Likewise, also, you can show that the soul is not a number, by

dividing all numbers into either odd or even: for then, if the soul be

neither odd nor even, clearly it is not a number.

    In regard then to Accident, you should set to work by means like

these, and in this manner.



