




                              Book VII

                                 1



  WHETHER two things are 'the same' or 'different', in the most

literal of the meanings ascribed to 'sameness' (and we said' that 'the

same' applies in the most literal sense to what is numerically one),

may be examined in the light of their inflexions and coordinates and

opposites. For if justice be the same as courage, then too the just

man is the same as the brave man, and 'justly' is the same as

'bravely'. Likewise, too, in the case of their opposites: for if two

things be the same, their opposites also will be the same, in any of

the recognized forms of opposition. For it is the same thing to take

the opposite of the one or that of the other, seeing that they are the

same. Again it may be examined in the light of those things which tend

to produce or to destroy the things in question of their formation and

destruction, and in general of any thing that is related in like

manner to each. For where things are absolutely the same, their

formations and destructions also are the same, and so are the things

that tend to produce or to destroy them. Look and see also, in a

case where one of two things is said to be something or other in a

superlative degree, if the other of these alleged identical things can

also be described by a superlative in the same respect. Thus

Xenocrates argues that the happy life and the good life are the

same, seeing that of all forms of life the good life is the most

desirable and so also is the happy life: for 'the most desirable'

and the greatest' apply but to one thing.' Likewise also in other

cases of the kind. Each, however, of the two things termed

'greatest' or most desirable' must be numerically one: otherwise no

proof will have been given that they are the same; for it does not

follow because Peloponnesians and Spartans are the bravest of the

Greeks, that Peloponnesians are the same as Spartans, seeing that

'Peloponnesian' is not any one person nor yet 'Spartan'; it only

follows that the one must be included under the other as 'Spartans'

are under 'Peloponnesians': for otherwise, if the one class be not

included under the other, each will be better than the other. For then

the Peloponnesians are bound to be better than the Spartans, seeing

that the one class is not included under the other; for they are

better than anybody else. Likewise also the Spartans must perforce

be better than the Peloponnesians; for they too are better than

anybody else; each then is better than the other! Clearly therefore

what is styled 'best' and 'greatest' must be a single thing, if it

is to be proved to be 'the same' as another. This also is why

Xenocrates fails to prove his case: for the happy life is not

numerically single, nor yet the good life, so that it does not

follow that, because they are both the most desirable, they are

therefore the same, but only that the one falls under the other.

  Again, look and see if, supposing the one to be the same as

something, the other also is the same as it: for if they be not both

the same as the same thing, clearly neither are they the same as one

another.

  Moreover, examine them in the light of their accidents or of the

things of which they are accidents: for any accident belonging to

the one must belong also to the other, and if the one belong to

anything as an accident, so must the other also. If in any of these

respects there is a discrepancy, clearly they are not the same.

  See further whether, instead of both being found in one class of

predicates, the one signifies a quality and the other a quantity or

relation. Again, see if the genus of each be not the same, the one

being 'good' and the other evil', or the one being 'virtue' and the

other 'knowledge': or see if, though the genus is the same, the

differentiae predicted of either be not the same, the one (e.g.) being

distinguished as a 'speculative' science, the other as a 'practical'

science. Likewise also in other cases.

  Moreover, from the point of view of 'degrees', see if the one admits

an increase of degree but not the other, or if though both admit it,

they do not admit it at the same time; just as it is not the case that

a man desires intercourse more intensely, the more intensely he is

in love, so that love and the desire for intercourse are not the same.

  Moreover, examine them by means of an addition, and see whether

the addition of each to the same thing fails to make the same whole;

or if the subtraction of the same thing from each leaves a different

remainder. Suppose (e.g.) that he has declared 'double a half' to be

the same as 'a multiple of a half': then, subtracting the words 'a

half' from each, the remainders ought to have signified the same

thing: but they do not; for 'double' and 'a multiple of' do not

signify the same thing.

  Inquire also not only if some impossible consequence results

directly from the statement made, that A and B are the same, but

also whether it is possible for a supposition to bring it about; as

happens to those who assert that 'empty' is the same as 'full of air':

for clearly if the air be exhausted, the vessel will not be less but

more empty, though it will no longer be full of air. So that by a

supposition, which may be true or may be false (it makes no difference

which), the one character is annulled and not the other, showing

that they are not the same.

  Speaking generally, one ought to be on the look-out for any

discrepancy anywhere in any sort of predicate of each term, and in the

things of which they are predicated. For all that is predicated of the

one should be predicated also of the other, and of whatever the one is

a predicate, the other should be a predicate of it as well.

  Moreover, as 'sameness' is a term used in many senses, see whether

things that are the same in one way are the same also in a different

way. For there is either no necessity or even no possibility that

things that are the same specifically or generically should be

numerically the same, and it is with the question whether they are

or are not the same in that sense that we are concerned.

  Moreover, see whether the one can exist without the other; for, if

so, they could not be the same.



                                 2



  Such is the number of the commonplace rules that relate to

'sameness'. It is clear from what has been said that all the

destructive commonplaces relating to sameness are useful also in

questions of definition, as was said before:' for if what is signified

by the term and by the expression be not the same, clearly the

expression rendered could not be a definition. None of the

constructive commonplaces, on the other hand, helps in the matter of

definition; for it is not enough to show the sameness of content

between the expression and the term, in order to establish that the

former is a definition, but a definition must have also all the

other characters already announced.



                                 3



  This then is the way, and these the arguments, whereby the attempt

to demolish a definition should always be made. If, on the other hand,

we desire to establish one, the first thing to observe is that few

if any who engage in discussion arrive at a definition by reasoning:

they always assume something of the kind as their starting points-both

in geometry and in arithmetic and the other studies of that kind. In

the second place, to say accurately what a definition is, and how it

should be given, belongs to another inquiry. At present it concerns us

only so far as is required for our present purpose, and accordingly we

need only make the bare statement that to reason to a thing's

definition and essence is quite possible. For if a definition is an

expression signifying the essence of the thing and the predicates

contained therein ought also to be the only ones which are

predicated of the thing in the category of essence; and genera and

differentiae are so predicated in that category: it is obvious that if

one were to get an admission that so and so are the only attributes

predicated in that category, the expression containing so and so would

of necessity be a definition; for it is impossible that anything

else should be a definition, seeing that there is not anything else

predicated of the thing in the category of essence.

  That a definition may thus be reached by a process of reasoning is

obvious. The means whereby it should be established have been more

precisely defined elsewhere, but for the purposes of the inquiry now

before us the same commonplace rules serve. For we have to examine

into the contraries and other opposites of the thing, surveying the

expressions used both as wholes and in detail: for if the opposite

definition defines that opposite term, the definition given must of

necessity be that of the term before us. Seeing, however, that

contraries may be conjoined in more than one way, we have to select

from those contraries the one whose contrary definition seems most

obvious. The expressions, then, have to be examined each as a whole in

the way we have said, and also in detail as follows. First of all, see

that the genus rendered is correctly rendered; for if the contrary

thing be found in the contrary genus to that stated in the definition,

and the thing before you is not in that same genus, then it would

clearly be in the contrary genus: for contraries must of necessity

be either in the same genus or in contrary genera. The differentiae,

too, that are predicated of contraries we expect to be contrary,

e.g. those of white and black, for the one tends to pierce the vision,

while the other tends to compress it. So that if contrary differentiae

to those in the definition are predicated of the contrary term, then

those rendered in the definition would be predicated of the term

before us. Seeing, then, that both the genus and the differentiae have

been rightly rendered, clearly the expression given must be the

right definition. It might be replied that there is no necessity why

contrary differentiae should be predicated of contraries, unless the

contraries be found within the same genus: of things whose genera

are themselves contraries it may very well be that the same

differentia is used of both, e.g. of justice and injustice; for the

one is a virtue and the other a vice of the soul: 'of the soul',

therefore, is the differentia in both cases, seeing that the body as

well has its virtue and vice. But this much at least is true, that the

differentiae of contraries are either contrary or else the same. If,

then, the contrary differentia to that given be predicated of the

contrary term and not of the one in hand, clearly the differentia

stated must be predicated of the latter. Speaking generally, seeing

that the definition consists of genus and differentiae, if the

definition of the contrary term be apparent, the definition of the

term before you will be apparent also: for since its contrary is found

either in the same genus or in the contrary genus, and likewise also

the differentiae predicated of opposites are either contrary to, or

the same as, each other, clearly of the term before you there will

be predicated either the same genus as of its contrary, while, of

its differentiae, either all are contrary to those of its contrary, or

at least some of them are so while the rest remain the same; or,

vice versa, the differentiae will be the same and the genera contrary;

or both genera and differentiae will be contrary. And that is all; for

that both should be the same is not possible; else contraries will

have the same definition.

  Moreover, look at it from the point of view of its inflexions and

coordinates. For genera and definitions are bound to correspond in

either case. Thus if forgetfulness be the loss of knowledge, to forget

is to lose knowledge, and to have forgotten is to have lost knowledge.

If, then, any one whatever of these is agreed to, the others must of

necessity be agreed to as well. Likewise, also, if destruction is

the decomposition of the thing's essence, then to be destroyed is to

have its essence decomposed, and 'destructively' means 'in such a

way as to decompose its essence'; if again 'destructive' means 'apt to

decompose something's essence', then also 'destruction' means 'the

decomposition of its essence'. Likewise also with the rest: an

admission of any one of them whatever, and all the rest are admitted

too.

    Moreover, look at it from the point of view of things that stand

in relations that are like each other. For if 'healthy' means

'productive of health', 'vigorous' too will mean 'productive of

vigour', and 'useful' will mean 'productive of good.' For each of

these things is related in like manner to its own peculiar end, so

that if one of them is defined as 'productive of' that end, this

will also be the definition of each of the rest as well.

    Moreover, look at it from the point of and like degrees, in all

the ways in which it is possible to establish a result by comparing

two and two together. Thus if A defines a better than B defines and

B is a definition of so too is A of a. Further, if A's claim to define

a is like B's to define B, and B defines B, then A too defines a. This

examination from the point of view of greater degrees is of no use

when a single definition is compared with two things, or two

definitions with one thing; for there cannot possibly be one

definition of two things or two of the same thing.



                                 4



  The most handy of all the commonplace arguments are those just

mentioned and those from co-ordinates and inflexions, and these

therefore are those which it is most important to master and to have

ready to hand: for they are the most useful on the greatest number

of occasions. Of the rest, too, the most important are those of most

general application: for these are the most effective, e.g. that you

should examine the individual cases, and then look to see in the

case of their various species whether the definition applies. For

the species is synonymous with its individuals. This sort of inquiry

is of service against those who assume the existence of Ideas, as

has been said before.' Moreover see if a man has used a term

metaphorically, or predicated it of itself as though it were something

different. So too if any other of the commonplace rules is of

general application and effective, it should be employed.



                                 5



  That it is more difficult to establish than to overthrow a

definition, is obvious from considerations presently to be urged.

For to see for oneself, and to secure from those whom one is

questioning, an admission of premisses of this sort is no simple

matter, e.g. that of the elements of the definition rendered the one

is genus and the other differentia, and that only the genus and

differentiae are predicated in the category of essence. Yet without

these premisses it is impossible to reason to a definition; for if any

other things as well are predicated of the thing in the category of

essence, there is no telling whether the formula stated or some

other one is its definition, for a definition is an expression

indicating the essence of a thing. The point is clear also from the

following: It is easier to draw one conclusion than many. Now in

demolishing a definition it is sufficient to argue against one point

only (for if we have overthrown any single point whatsoever, we

shall have demolished the definition); whereas in establishing a

definition, one is bound to bring people to the view that everything

contained in the definition is attributable. Moreover, in establishing

a case, the reasoning brought forward must be universal: for the

definition put forward must be predicated of everything of which the

term is predicated, and must moreover be convertible, if the

definition rendered is to be peculiar to the subject. In

overthrowing a view, on the other hand, there is no longer any

necessity to show one's point universally: for it is enough to show

that the formula is untrue of any one of the things embraced under the

term.

  Further, even supposing it should be necessary to overthrow

something by a universal proposition, not even so is there any need to

prove the converse of the proposition in the process of overthrowing

the definition. For merely to show that the definition fails to be

predicated of every one of the things of which the term is predicated,

is enough to overthrow it universally: and there is no need to prove

the converse of this in order to show that the term is predicated of

things of which the expression is not predicated. Moreover, even if it

applies to everything embraced under the term, but not to it alone,

the definition is thereby demolished.

  The case stands likewise in regard to the property and genus of a

term also. For in both cases it is easier to overthrow than to

establish. As regards the property this is clear from what has been

said: for as a rule the property is rendered in a complex phrase, so

that to overthrow it, it is only necessary to demolish one of the

terms used, whereas to establish it is necessary to reason to them

all. Then, too, nearly all the other rules that apply to the

definition will apply also to the property of a thing. For in

establishing a property one has to show that it is true of

everything included under the term in question, whereas to overthrow

one it is enough to show in a single case only that it fails to

belong: further, even if it belongs to everything falling under the

term, but not to that only, it is overthrown in this case as well,

as was explained in the case of the definition. In regard to the

genus, it is clear that you are bound to establish it in one way only,

viz. by showing that it belongs in every case, while of overthrowing

it there are two ways: for if it has been shown that it belongs either

never or not in a certain case, the original statement has been

demolished. Moreover, in establishing a genus it is not enough to show

that it belongs, but also that it belongs as genus has to be shown;

whereas in overthrowing it, it is enough to show its failure to belong

either in some particular case or in every case. It appears, in

fact, as though, just as in other things to destroy is easier than

to create, so in these matters too to overthrow is easier than to

establish.

  In the case of an accidental attribute the universal proposition

is easier to overthrow than to establish; for to establish it, one has

to show that it belongs in every case, whereas to overthrow it, it

is enough to show that it does not belong in one single case. The

particular proposition is, on the contrary, easier to establish than

to overthrow: for to establish it, it is enough to show that it

belongs in a particular instance, whereas to overthrow it, it has to

be shown that it never belongs at all.

  It is clear also that the easiest thing of all is to overthrow a

definition. For on account of the number of statements involved we are

presented in the definition with the greatest number of points for

attack, and the more plentiful the material, the quicker an argument

comes: for there is more likelihood of a mistake occurring in a

large than in a small number of things. Moreover, the other rules

too may be used as means for attacking a definition: for if either the

formula be not peculiar, or the genus rendered be the wrong one, or

something included in the formula fail to belong, the definition is

thereby demolished. On the other hand, against the others we cannot

bring all of the arguments drawn from definitions, nor yet of the

rest: for only those relating to accidental attributes apply generally

to all the aforesaid kinds of attribute. For while each of the

aforesaid kinds of attribute must belong to the thing in question, yet

the genus may very well not belong as a property without as yet

being thereby demolished. Likewise also the property need not belong

as a genus, nor the accident as a genus or property, so long as they

do belong. So that it is impossible to use one set as a basis of

attack upon the other except in the case of definition. Clearly, then,

it is the easiest of all things to demolish a definition, while to

establish one is the hardest. For there one both has to establish

all those other points by reasoning (i.e. that the attributes stated

belong, and that the genus rendered is the true genus, and that the

formula is peculiar to the term), and moreover, besides this, that the

formula indicates the essence of the thing; and this has to be done

correctly.

  Of the rest, the property is most nearly of this kind: for it is

easier to demolish, because as a rule it contains several terms; while

it is the hardest to establish, both because of the number of things

that people must be brought to accept, and, besides this, because it

belongs to its subject alone and is predicated convertibly with its

subject.

  The easiest thing of all to establish is an accidental predicate:

for in other cases one has to show not only that the predicate

belongs, but also that it belongs in such and such a particular way:

whereas in the case of the accident it is enough to show merely that

it belongs. On the other hand, an accidental predicate is the

hardest thing to overthrow, because it affords the least material: for

in stating accident a man does not add how the predicate belongs;

and accordingly, while in other cases it is possible to demolish

what is said in two ways, by showing either that the predicate does

not belong, or that it does not belong in the particular way stated,

in the case of an accidental predicate the only way to demolish it

is to show that it does not belong at all.

  The commonplace arguments through which we shall be well supplied

with lines of argument with regard to our several problems have now

been enumerated at about sufficient length.



