






INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDIX



THE reader who has followed the foregoing narrative

may feel that inasmuch as it is intended to

be an historical document, an appropriate addendum

thereto would be a digest of all the inventions of

Edison. The desirability of such a digest is not to

be denied, but as there are some twenty-five hundred

or more inventions to be considered (including those

covered by caveats), the task of its preparation would

be stupendous. Besides, the resultant data would

extend this book into several additional volumes,

thereby rendering it of value chiefly to the technical

student, but taking it beyond the bounds of biography.



We should, however, deem our presentation of Mr.

Edison's work to be imperfectly executed if we neglected

to include an intelligible exposition of the broader

theoretical principles of his more important inventions. In

the following Appendix we have therefore endeavored

to present a few brief statements regarding Mr. Edison's

principal inventions, classified as to subject-

matter and explained in language as free from

technicalities as is possible. No attempt has been made

to conform with strictly scientific terminology, but,

for the benefit of the general reader, well-understood

conventional expressions, such as "flow of current,"

etc., have been employed. It should be borne in

mind that each of the following items has been treated

as a whole or class, generally speaking, and not as a

digest of all the individual patents relating to it.

Any one who is sufficiently interested can obtain copies

of any of the patents referred to for five cents each

by addressing the Commissioner of Patents, Washington,

D. C.







APPENDIX



THE STOCK PRINTER



IN these modern days, when the Stock Ticker is in universal

use, one seldom, if ever, hears the name of Edison

coupled with the little instrument whose chatterings have

such tremendous import to the whole world. It is of much

interest, however, to remember the fact that it was by reason

of his notable work in connection with this device that

he first became known as an inventor. Indeed, it was

through the intrinsic merits of his improvements in stock

tickers that he made his real entree into commercial

life.



The idea of the ticker did not originate with Edison, as

we have already seen in Chapter VII of the preceding narrative,

but at the time of his employment with the Western

Union, in Boston, in 1868, the crudities of the earlier forms

made an impression on his practical mind, and he got out

an improved instrument of his own, which he introduced in

Boston through the aid of a professional promoter. Edison,

then only twenty-one, had less business experience than the

promoter, through whose manipulation he soon lost his financial

interest in this early ticker enterprise. The narrative

tells of his coming to New York in 1869, and immediately

plunging into the business of gold and stock reporting. It

was at this period that his real work on stock printers

commenced, first individually, and later as a co-worker with

F. L. Pope. This inventive period extended over a number

of years, during which time he took out forty-six patents on

stock-printing instruments and devices, two of such patents

being issued to Edison and Pope as joint inventors. These

various inventions were mostly in the line of development of

the art as it progressed during those early years, but out

of it all came the Edison universal printer, which entered

into very extensive use, and which is still used throughout

the United States and in some foreign countries to a

considerable extent at this very day.



Edison's inventive work on stock printers has left its

mark upon the art as it exists at the present time. In his

earlier work he directed his attention to the employment of

a single-circuit system, in which only one wire was required,

the two operations of setting the type-wheels and of printing

being controlled by separate electromagnets which were

actuated through polarized relays, as occasion required, one

polarity energizing the electromagnet controlling the type-

wheels, and the opposite polarity energizing the electromagnet

controlling the printing. Later on, however, he

changed over to a two-wire circuit, such as shown in Fig. 2

of this article in connection with the universal stock printer.

In the earliest days of the stock printer, Edison realized the

vital commercial importance of having all instruments recording

precisely alike at the same moment, and it was he

who first devised (in 1869) the "unison stop," by means of

which all connected instruments could at any moment be

brought to zero from the central transmitting station, and

thus be made to work in correspondence with the central

instrument and with one another. He also originated the

idea of using only one inking-pad and shifting it from side to

side to ink the type-wheels. It was also in Edison's stock

printer that the principle of shifting type-wheels was first

employed. Hence it will be seen that, as in many other

arts, he made a lasting impression in this one by the intrinsic

merits of the improvements resulting from his work

therein.



We shall not attempt to digest the forty-six patents above

named, nor to follow Edison through the progressive steps

which led to the completion of his universal printer, but

shall simply present a sketch of the instrument itself, and

follow with a very brief and general explanation of its theory.

The Edison universal printer, as it virtually appears in

practice, is illustrated in Fig. 1 below, from which it will be

seen that the most prominent parts are the two type-wheels,

the inking-pad, and the paper tape feeding from the reel,

all appropriately placed in a substantial framework.



The electromagnets and other actuating

mechanism cannot be seen plainly

in this figure, but are produced

diagrammatically in Fig. 2, and somewhat

enlarged for convenience of explanation.



It will be seen that there are two electromagnets, one of which, TM, is known

as the "type-magnet," and the other, PM, as the "press-magnet,"

the former having to do with the operation of the type-

wheels, and the latter with the pressing of the

paper tape against them.  As will be seen from the

diagram, the armature, A, of the type-magnet

has an extension arm, on the end of which is

an escapement engaging with a toothed wheel placed at the extremity of the shaft

carrying the type-wheels. This extension arm is pivoted

at B. Hence, as the armature is alternately attracted

when current passes around its electromagnet, and

drawn up by the spring on cessation of current, it moves

up and down, thus actuating the escapement and causing a

rotation of the toothed wheel in the direction of the arrow.

This, in turn, brings any desired letters or figures on the

type-wheels to a central point, where they may be impressed

upon the paper tape. One type-wheel carries letters, and

the other one figures. These two wheels are mounted rigidly

on a sleeve carried by the wheel-shaft. As it is desired

to print from only one type-wheel at a time, it becomes

necessary to shift them back and forth from time to time, in

order to bring the desired characters in line with the paper

tape. This is accomplished through the movements of a

three-arm rocking-lever attached to the wheel-sleeve at

the end of the shaft. This lever is actuated through the

agency of two small pins carried by an arm projecting from

the press-lever, PL. As the latter moves up and down the

pins play upon the under side of the lower arm of the rocking-

lever, thus canting it and pushing the type-wheels to the

right or left, as the case may be. The operation of shifting

the type-wheels will be given further on.



The press-lever is actuated by the press-magnet. From

the diagram it will be seen that the armature of the latter

has a long, pivoted extension arm, or platen, trough-like in

shape, in which the paper tape runs. It has already been

noted that the object of the press-lever is to press this tape

against that character of the type-wheel centrally located

above it at the moment. It will at once be perceived that

this action takes place when current flows through the

electromagnet and its armature is attracted downward, the

platen again dropping away from the type-wheel as the

armature is released upon cessation of current. The paper

"feed" is shown at the end of the press-lever, and consists

of a push "dog," or pawl, which operates to urge the paper

forward as the press-lever descends.



The worm-gear which appears in the diagram on the shaft,

near the toothed wheel, forms part of the unison stop above

referred to, but this device is not shown in full, in order to

avoid unnecessary complications of the drawing.



At the right-hand side of the diagram (Fig. 2) is shown a

portion of the transmitting apparatus at a central office.

Generally speaking, this consists of a motor-driven cylinder

having metallic pins placed at intervals, and arranged

spirally, around its periphery. These pins correspond in

number to the characters on the type-wheels. A keyboard

(not shown) is arranged above the cylinder, having keys

lettered and numbered corresponding to the letters and

figures on the type-wheels. Upon depressing any one of

these keys the motion of the cylinder is arrested when one

of its pins is caught and held by the depressed key. When

the key is released the cylinder continues in motion. Hence,

it is evident that the revolution of the cylinder may be

interrupted as often as desired by manipulation of the various

keys in transmitting the letters and figures which are to be

recorded by the printing instrument. The method of transmission

will presently appear.



In the sketch (Fig. 2) there will be seen, mounted upon

the cylinder shaft, two wheels made up of metallic segments

insulated from each other, and upon the hubs of these

wheels are two brushes which connect with the main battery.

Resting upon the periphery of these two segmental wheels

there are two brushes to which are connected the wires which

carry the battery current to the type-magnet and press-

magnet, respectively, as the brushes make circuit by coming

in contact with the metallic segments. It will be remembered

that upon the cylinder there are as many pins as there

are characters on the type-wheels of the ticker, and one of

the segmental wheels, W, has a like number of metallic

segments, while upon the other wheel, W', there are only

one-half that number. The wheel W controls the supply of

current to the press-magnet, and the wheel W' to the type-

magnet. The type-magnet advances the letter and figure

wheels one step when the magnet is energized, and a succeeding

step when the circuit is broken. Hence, the metallic

contact surfaces on wheel W' are, as stated, only half as

many as on the wheel W, which controls the press-magnet.



It should be borne in mind, however, that the contact

surfaces and insulated surfaces on wheel W' are together

equal in number to the characters on the type-wheels, but

the retractile spring of TM does half the work of operating

the escapement. On the other hand, the wheel W has the

full number of contact surfaces, because it must provide

for the operative closure of the press-magnet circuit whether

the brush B' is in engagement with a metallic segment or

an insulated segment of the wheel W'. As the cylinder

revolves, the wheels are carried around with its shaft and

current impulses flow through the wires to the magnets as

the brushes make contact with the metallic segments of

these wheels.



One example will be sufficient to convey to the reader

an idea of the operation of the apparatus. Assuming, for

instance, that it is desired to send out the letters AM to the

printer, let us suppose that the pin corresponding to the

letter A is at one end of the cylinder and near the upper part

of its periphery, and that the letter M is about the centre

of the cylinder and near the lower part of its periphery.

The operator at the keyboard would depress the letter A,

whereupon the cylinder would in its revolution bring the

first-named pin against the key. During the rotation of the

cylinder a current would pass through wheel W' and actuate

TM, drawing down the armature and operating the escapement,

which would bring the type-wheel to a point where

the letter A would be central as regards the paper tape

When the cylinder came to rest, current would flow through

the brush of wheel W to PM, and its armature would be

attracted, causing the platen to be lifted and thus bringing

the paper tape in contact with the type-wheel and printing

the letter A. The operator next sends the letter M by

depressing the appropriate key. On account of the position

of the corresponding pin, the cylinder would make nearly

half a revolution before bringing the pin to the key. During

this half revolution the segmental wheels have also been

turning, and the brushes have transmitted a number of current

impulses to TM, which have caused it to operate the

escapement a corresponding number of times, thus turning

the type-wheels around to the letter M. When the cylinder

stops, current once more goes to the press-magnet, and the

operation of lifting and printing is repeated. As a matter

of fact, current flows over both circuits as the cylinder is

rotated, but the press-magnet is purposely made to be

comparatively "sluggish" and the narrowness of the segments

on wheel W tends to diminish the flow of current in the press

circuit until the cylinder comes to rest, when the current

continuously flows over that circuit without interruption

and fully energizes the press-magnet. The shifting of the

type-wheels is brought about as follows: On the keyboard

of the transmitter there are two characters known as "dots"--

namely, the letter dot and the figure dot. If the operator

presses one of these dot keys, it is engaged by an appropriate

pin on the revolving cylinder. Meanwhile the type-wheels

are rotating, carrying with them the rocking-lever, and current

is pulsating over both circuits. When the type-wheels

have arrived at the proper point the rocking-lever has been

carried to a position where its lower arm is directly over one

of the pins on the arm extending from the platen of the

press-lever. The cylinder stops, and current operates the

sluggish press-magnet, causing its armature to be attracted,

thus lifting the platen and its projecting arm. As the arm

lifts upward, the pin moves along the under side of the

lower arm of the rocking-lever, thus causing it to cant and

shift the type-wheels to the right or left, as desired. The

principles of operation of this apparatus have been confined

to a very brief and general description, but it is believed

to be sufficient for the scope of this article.







NOTE.--The illustrations in this article are reproduced from American Telegra-

phy

and Encyclopedia of the Telegraph, by William Maver, Jr., by permission of

Maver Publishing Company, New York.







II



THE QUADRUPLEX AND PHONOPLEX



EDISON'S work in stock printers and telegraphy had marked

him as a rising man in the electrical art of the period

but his invention of quadruplex telegraphy in 1874 was what

brought him very prominently before the notice of the public.

Duplex telegraphy, or the sending of two separate messages

in opposite directions at the same time over one line

was known and practiced previous to this time, but quadruplex

telegraphy, or the simultaneous sending of four

separate messages, two in each direction, over a single line

had not been successfully accomplished, although it had

been the subject of many an inventor's dream and the object

of anxious efforts for many long years.



In the early part of 1873, and for some time afterward,

the system invented by Joseph Stearns was the duplex in

practical use. In April of that year, however, Edison took

up the study of the subject and filed two applications for

patents. One of these applications[23] embraced an invention

by which two messages could be sent not only duplex,

or in opposite directions as above explained, but could also

be sent "diplex"--that is to say, in one direction, simultaneously,

as separate and distinct messages, over the one line.

Thus there was introduced a new feature into the art of

multiplex telegraphy, for, whereas duplexing (accomplished

by varying the strength of the current) permitted messages

to be sent simultaneously from opposite stations, diplexing

(achieved by also varying the direction of the current) permitted

the simultaneous transmission of two messages from

the same station and their separate reception at the distant

station.





[23] Afterward issued as Patent No. 162,633, April 27, 1875.







The quadruplex was the tempting goal toward which Edison

now constantly turned, and after more than a year's strenuous

work he filed a number of applications for patents in the

late summer of 1874. Among them was one which was issued

some years afterward as Patent No. 480,567, covering

his well-known quadruplex. He had improved his own

diplex, combined it with the Stearns duplex and thereby

produced a system by means of which four messages could

be sent over a single line at the same time, two in each

direction.



As the reader will probably be interested to learn something

of the theoretical principles of this fascinating invention,

we shall endeavor to offer a brief and condensed explanation

thereof with as little technicality as the subject

will permit. This explanation will necessarily be of somewhat

elementary character for the benefit of the lay reader,

whose indulgence is asked for an occasional reiteration

introduced for the sake of clearness of comprehension. While

the apparatus and the circuits are seemingly very intricate,

the principles are really quite simple, and the difficulty of

comprehension is more apparent than real if the underlying

phenomena are studied attentively.



At the root of all systems of telegraphy, including multiplex

systems, there lies the single basic principle upon which

their performance depends--namely, the obtaining of a

slight mechanical movement at the more or less distant end

of a telegraph line. This is accomplished through the

utilization of the phenomena of electromagnetism. These

phenomena are easy of comprehension and demonstration.

If a rod of soft iron be wound around with a number of turns

of insulated wire, and a current of electricity be sent through

the wire, the rod will be instantly magnetized and will remain

a magnet as long as the current flows; but when the

current is cut off the magnetic effect instantly ceases. This

device is known as an electromagnet, and the charging and

discharging of such a magnet may, of course, be repeated

indefinitely. Inasmuch as a magnet has the power of attracting

to itself pieces of iron or steel, the basic importance

of an electromagnet in telegraphy will be at once apparent

when we consider the sounder, whose clicks are familiar to

every ear. This instrument consists essentially of an electro-

magnet of horseshoe form with its two poles close together,

and with its armature, a bar of iron, maintained in close

proximity to the poles, but kept normally in a retracted position

by a spring. When the distant operator presses down

his key the circuit is closed and a current passes along the

line and through the (generally two) coils of the electromagnet,

thus magnetizing the iron core. Its attractive power

draws the armature toward the poles. When the operator

releases the pressure on his key the circuit is broken, current

does not flow, the magnetic effect ceases, and the armature

is drawn back by its spring. These movements give rise

to the clicking sounds which represent the dots and dashes

of the Morse or other alphabet as transmitted by the operator.

Similar movements, produced in like manner, are availed

of in another instrument known as the relay, whose office

is to act practically as an automatic transmitter key, repeating

the messages received in its coils, and sending them

on to the next section of the line, equipped with its own

battery; or, when the message is intended for its own station,

sending the message to an adjacent sounder included

in a local battery circuit. With a simple circuit, therefore,

between two stations and where an intermediate battery is

not necessary, a relay is not used.



Passing on to the consideration of another phase of the

phenomena of electromagnetism, the reader's attention is

called to Fig. 1, in which will be seen on the left a simple

form of electromagnet consisting of a bar of soft iron wound

around with insulated wire, through which a current is flowing

from a battery. The arrows indicate the direction of

flow.



All magnets have two poles, north and south. A permanent

magnet (made of steel, which, as distinguished from soft

iron, retains its magnetism for long periods) is so called

because it is permanently magnetized and its polarity remains

fixed. In an electromagnet the magnetism exists

only as long as current is flowing through the wire, and the

polarity of the soft-iron bar is determined by the DIRECTION

of flow of current around it for the time being. If the direction

is reversed, the polarity will also be reversed. Assuming,

for instance, the bar to be end-on toward the observer,

that end will be a south pole if the current is flowing

from left to right, clockwise, around the bar; or a north

pole if flowing in the other direction, as illustrated at the

right of the figure. It is immaterial which way the wire is

wound around the bar, the determining factor of polarity

being the DIRECTION of the current. It will be clear, therefore,

that if two EQUAL currents be passed around a bar in opposite

directions (Fig. 3) they will tend to produce exactly opposite

polarities and thus neutralize each other. Hence, the bar

would remain non-magnetic.



As the path to the quadruplex passes through the duplex,

let us consider the Stearns system, after noting one other

principle--namely, that if more than one path is presented

in which an electric current may complete its circuit, it

divides in proportion to the resistance of each path. Hence,

if we connect one pole of a battery with the earth, and from

the other pole run to the earth two wires of equal resistance

as illustrated in Fig. 2, equal currents will traverse

the wires.



The above principles were employed in the Stearns differential

duplex system in the following manner: Referring to

Fig. 3, suppose a wire, A, is led from a battery around a bar

of soft iron from left to right, and another wire of equal

resistance and equal number of turns, B, around from right

to left. The flow of current will cause two equal opposing

actions to be set up in the bar; one will exactly offset the

other, and no magnetic effect will be produced. A relay

thus wound is known as a differential relay--more generally

called a neutral relay.



The non-technical reader may wonder what use can possibly

be made of an apparently non-operative piece of appara-

tus. It must be borne in mind, however, in considering a

duplex system, that a differential relay is used AT EACH END

of the line and forms part of the circuit; and that while each

relay must be absolutely unresponsive to the signals SENT

OUT FROM ITS HOME OFFICE, it must respond to signals transmitted

by a DISTANT OFFICE. Hence, the next figure (4), with

its accompanying explanation, will probably make the

matter clear. If another battery, D, be introduced at the

distant end of the wire A the differential or neutral relay

becomes actively operative as follows: Battery C supplies

wires A and B with an equal current, but battery D doubles

the strength of the current traversing wire A. This is sufficient

to not only neutralize the magnetism which the cur-

rent in wire B would tend to set up, but also--by reason of

the excess of current in wire A--to make the bar a magnet

whose polarity would be determined by the direction of the

flow of current around it.



In the arrangement shown in Fig. 4 the batteries are so

connected that current flow is in the same direction, thus

doubling the amount of current flowing through wire A.

But suppose the batteries were so connected that the current

from each set flowed in an opposite direction? The result

would be that these currents would oppose and neutralize

each other, and, therefore, none would flow in wire A.

Inasmuch, however, as there is nothing to hinder, current

would flow from battery C through wire B, and the bar

would therefore be magnetized. Hence, assuming that the

relay is to be actuated from the distant end, D, it is in a

sense immaterial whether the batteries connected with wire

A assist or oppose each other, as, in either case, the bar would

be magnetized only through the operation of the distant key.



A slight elaboration of Fig. 4 will further illustrate the

principle of the differential duplex. In Fig. 5 are two stations,

A the home end, and B the distant station to which

a message is to be sent. The relay at each end has two coils,

1 and 2, No. 1 in each case being known as the "main-line

coil" and 2 as the "artificial-line coil." The latter, in each

case, has in its circuit a resistance, R, to compensate for the

resistance of the main line, so that there shall be no inequalities

in the circuits. The artificial line, as well as that

to which the two coils are joined, are connected to earth.

There is a battery, C, and a key, K. When the key is depressed,

current flows through the relay coils at A, but no

magnetism is produced, as they oppose each other. The

current, however, flows out through the main-line coil over

the line and through the main-line coil 1 at B, completing

its circuit to earth and magnetizing the bar of the relay,

thus causing its armature to be attracted. On releasing

the key the circuit is broken and magnetism instantly ceases.



It will be evident, therefore, that the operator at A may

cause the relay at B to act without affecting his own relay.

Similar effects would be produced from B to A if the battery

and key were placed at the B end.



If, therefore, like instruments are placed at each end of

the line, as in Fig. 6, we have a differential duplex arrangement

by means of which two operators may actuate relays

at the ends distant from them, without causing the operation

of the relays at their home ends. In practice this is

done by means of a special instrument known as a continuity

preserving transmitter, or, usually, as a transmitter.

This consists of an electromagnet, T, operated by a key, K,

and separate battery. The armature lever, L, is long,

pivoted in the centre, and is bent over at the end. At a

point a little beyond its centre is a small piece of insulating

material to which is screwed a strip of spring metal,

S. Conveniently placed with reference to the end of the

lever is a bent metallic piece, P, having a contact screw in

its upper horizontal arm, and attached to the lower end of

this bent piece is a post, or standard, to which the main

battery is electrically connected. The relay coils are connected

by wire to the spring piece, S, and the armature lever

is connected to earth. If the key is depressed, the armature

is attracted and its bent end is moved upward, depressing

the spring which makes contact with the upper screw,

which places the battery to the line, and simultaneously

breaks the ground connection between the spring and the

upturned end of the lever, as shown at the left. When the

key is released the battery is again connected to earth.

The compensating resistances and condensers necessary for

a duplex arrangement are shown in the diagram.



In Fig. 6 one transmitter is shown as closed, at A, while

the other one is open. From our previous illustrations and

explanations it will be readily seen that, with the transmitter

closed at station A, current flows via post P, through

S, and to both relay coils at A, thence over the main line to

main-line coil at B, and down to earth through S and the

armature lever with its grounded wire. The relay at A

would be unresponsive, but the core of the relay at B would

be magnetized and its armature respond to signals from A.

In like manner, if the transmitter at B be closed, current

would flow through similar parts and thus cause the relay

at A to respond. If both transmitters be closed simultaneously,

both batteries will be placed to the line, which would

practically result in doubling the current in each of the

main-line coils, in consequence of which both relays are

energized and their armatures attracted through the operation

of the keys at the distant ends. Hence, two messages

can be sent in opposite directions over the same line simultaneously.



The reader will undoubtedly see quite clearly from the

above system, which rests upon varying the STRENGTH of the

current, that two messages could not be sent in the same

direction over the one line at the same time. To accomplish

this object Edison introduced another and distinct

feature--namely, the using of the same current, but ALSO

varying its DIRECTION of flow; that is to say, alternately

reversing the POLARITY of the batteries as applied to the line

and thus producing corresponding changes in the polarity

of another specially constructed type of relay, called a

polarized relay. To afford the reader a clear conception of

such a relay we would refer again to Fig. 1 and its explanation,

from which it appears that the polarity of a soft-iron bar

is determined not by the strength of the current flowing

around it but by the direction thereof.



With this idea clearly in mind, the theory of the polarized

relay, generally called "polar" relay, as presented in the

diagram (Fig. 7), will be readily understood.



A is a bar of soft iron, bent as shown, and wound around

with insulated copper wire, the ends of which are connected

with a battery, B, thus forming an electromagnet. An

essential part of this relay consists of a swinging PERMANENT

magnet, C, whose polarity remains fixed, that end between

the terminals of the electromagnet being a north pole.

Inasmuch as unlike poles of magnets are attracted to each

other and like poles repelled, it follows that this north pole

will be repelled by the north pole of the electromagnet, but

will swing over and be attracted by its south pole. If the

direction of flow of current be reversed, by reversing the

battery, the electromagnetic polarity also reverses and the

end of the permanent magnet swings over to the other side.

This is shown in the two figures of Fig. 7. This device being

a relay, its purpose is to repeat transmitted signals into a

local circuit, as before explained. For this purpose there are

provided at D and E a contact and a back stop, the former

of which is opened and closed by the swinging permanent

magnet, thus opening and closing the local circuit.



Manifestly there must be provided some convenient way

for rapidly transposing the direction of the current flow if

such a device as the polar relay is to be used for the reception

of telegraph messages, and this is accomplished by means

of an instrument called a pole-changer, which consists

essentially of a movable contact piece connected permanently

to the earth, or grounded, and arranged to connect one or

the other pole of a battery to the line and simultaneously

ground the other pole. This action of the pole-changer is

effected by movements of the armature of an electromagnet

through the manipulation of an ordinary telegraph key by

an operator at the home station, as in the operation of the

"transmitter," above referred to.



By a combination of the neutral relay and the polar relay

two operators, by manipulating two telegraph keys in the

ordinary way, can simultaneously send two messages over

one line in the SAME direction with the SAME current, one

operator varying its strength and the other operator varying

its polarity or direction of flow. This principle was covered

by Edison's Patent No. 162,633, and was known as

the "diplex" system, although, in the patent referred to,

Edison showed and claimed the adaptation of the principle

to duplex telegraphy. Indeed, as a matter of fact, it was

found that by winding the polar relay differentially and

arranging the circuits and collateral appliances appropriately,

the polar duplex system was more highly efficient than

the neutral system, and it is extensively used to the present

day.



Thus far we have referred to two systems, one the neutral

or differential duplex, and the other the combination of the

neutral and polar relays, making a diplex system. By one

of these two systems a single wire could be used for sending

two messages in opposite directions, and by the other in

the same direction or in opposite directions. Edison followed

up his work on the diplex and combined the two

systems into the quadruplex, by means of which FOUR messages

could be sent and received simultaneously over the

one wire, two in each direction, thus employing eight

operators--four at each end--two sending and two receiving.

The general principles of quadruplex telegraphy are

based upon the phenomena which we have briefly outlined

in connection with the neutral relay and the polar relay.

The equipment of such a system at each end of the line consists

of these two instruments, together with the special

form of transmitter and the pole-changer and their keys for

actuating the neutral and polar relays at the other, or distant,

end. Besides these there are the compensating resistances

and condensers. All of these will be seen in the

diagram (Fig. 8). It will be understood, of course, that the

polar relay, as used in the quadruplex system, is wound

differentially, and therefore its operation is somewhat similar

in principle to that of the differentially wound neutral relay,

in that it does not respond to the operation of the key at the

home office, but only operates in response to the movements

of the distant key.



Our explanation has merely aimed to show the underlying

phenomena and principles in broad outline without entering

into more detail than was deemed absolutely necessary. It

should be stated, however, that between the outline and the

filling in of the details there was an enormous amount of

hard work, study, patient plodding, and endless experiments

before Edison finally perfected his quadruplex system

in the year 1874.



If it were attempted to offer here a detailed explanation

of the varied and numerous operations of the quadruplex,

this article would assume the proportions of a treatise. An

idea of their complexity may be gathered from the following,

which is quoted from American Telegraphy and Encyclopedia

of the Telegraph, by William Maver, Jr.:





"It may well be doubted whether in the whole range of

applied electricity there occur such beautiful combinations,

so quickly made, broken up, and others reformed, as in the

operation of the Edison quadruplex. For example, it is

quite demonstrable that during the making of a simple dash

of the Morse alphabet by the neutral relay at the home

station the distant pole-changer may reverse its battery

several times; the home pole-changer may do likewise, and the

home transmitter may increase and decrease the electromotive

force of the home battery repeatedly. Simultaneously,

and, of course, as a consequence of the foregoing

actions, the home neutral relay itself may have had its

magnetism reversed several times, and the SIGNAL, that is,

the dash, will have been made, partly by the home battery,

partly by the distant and home batteries combined, partly

by current on the main line, partly by current on the artificial

line, partly by the main-line `static' current, partly

by the condenser static current, and yet, on a well-adjusted

circuit the dash will have been produced on the quadruplex

sounder as clearly as any dash on an ordinary single-wire

sounder."



We present a diagrammatic illustration of the Edison

quadruplex, battery key system, in Fig. 8, and refer the

reader to the above or other text-books if he desires to make

a close study of its intricate operations. Before finally

dismissing the quadruplex, and for the benefit of the inquiring

reader who may vainly puzzle over the intricacies of the circuits

shown in Fig. 8, a hint as to an essential difference between

the neutral relay, as used in the duplex and as used

in the quadruplex, may be given. With the duplex, as we

have seen, the current on the main line is changed in strength

only when both keys at OPPOSITE stations are closed together,

so that a current due to both batteries flows over the main

line. When a single message is sent from one station to the

other, or when both stations are sending messages that do

not conflict, only one battery or the other is connected to

the main line; but with the quadruplex, suppose one of the

operators, in New York for instance, is sending reversals of

current to Chicago; we can readily see how these changes

in polarity will operate the polar relay at the distant station,

but why will they not also operate the neutral relay at the

distant station as well? This difficulty was solved by dividing

the battery at each station into two unequal parts, the

smaller battery being always in circuit with the pole-changer

ready to have its polarity reversed on the main line to operate

the distant polar relay, but the spring retracting the

armature of the neutral relay is made so stiff as to resist

these weak currents. If, however, the transmitter is operated

at the same end, the entire battery is connected to the

main line, and the strength of this current is sufficient to

operate the neutral relay. Whether the part or all the battery

is alternately connected to or disconnected from the

main line by the transmitter, the current so varied in

strength is subject to reversal of polarity by the pole-changer;

but the variations in strength have no effect upon the distant

polar relay, because that relay being responsive to

changes in polarity of a weak current is obviously responsive

to corresponding changes in polarity of a powerful current.

With this distinction before him, the reader will have

no difficulty in following the circuits of Fig. 8, bearing always

in mind that by reason of the differential winding of the polar

and neutral relays, neither of the relays at one station will

respond to the home battery, and can only respond to the

distant battery--the polar relay responding when the polarity

of the current is reversed, whether the current be strong

or weak, and the neutral relay responding when the line-

current is increased, regardless of its polarity. It should

be added that besides the system illustrated in Fig. 8, which

is known as the differential principle, the quadruplex was

also arranged to operate on the Wheatstone bridge principle;

but it is not deemed necessary to enter into its details. The

underlying phenomena were similar, the difference consisting

largely in the arrangement of the circuits and apparatus.[24]





[24] Many of the illustrations in this article are reproduced

from American Telegraphy and Encyclopedia of the Telegraph,

by William Maver, Jr., by permission of Maver Publishing Company, New York.







Edison made another notable contribution to multiplex

telegraphy some years later in the Phonoplex. The name

suggests the use of the telephone, and such indeed is the

case. The necessity for this invention arose out of the

problem of increasing the capacity of telegraph lines employed

in "through" and "way" service, such as upon railroads.

In a railroad system there are usually two terminal

stations and a number of way stations. There is naturally

much intercommunication, which would be greatly curtailed

by a system having the capacity of only a single message

at a time. The duplexes above described could not

be used on a railroad telegraph system, because of the

necessity of electrically balancing the line, which, while

entirely feasible on a through line, would not be practicable

between a number of intercommunicating points. Edison's

phonoplex normally doubled the capacity of telegraph lines,

whether employed on way business or through traffic, but

in actual practice made it possible to obtain more than

double service. It has been in practical use for many years

on some of the leading railroads of the United States.



The system is a combination of telegraphic apparatus and

telephone receiver, although in this case the latter instrument

is not used in the generally understood manner. It

is well known that the diaphragm of a telephone vibrates

with the fluctuations of the current energizing the magnet

beneath it. If the make and break of the magnetizing current

be rapid, the vibrations being within the limits of the

human ear, the diaphragm will produce an audible sound;

but if the make and break be as slow as with ordinary Morse

transmission, the diaphragm will be merely flexed and return

to its original form without producing a sound. If, therefore,

there be placed in the same circuit a regular telegraph

relay and a special telephone, an operator may, by manipulating

a key, operate the relay (and its sounder) without

producing a sound in the telephone, as the makes and breaks

of the key are far below the limit of audibility. But if

through the same circuit, by means of another key suitably

connected there is sent the rapid changes in current from

an induction-coil, it will cause a series of loud clicks in the

telephone, corresponding to the signals transmitted; but

this current is too weak to affect the telegraph relay. It

will be seen, therefore, that this method of duplexing is

practiced, not by varying the strength or polarity, but by

sending TWO KINDS OF CURRENT over the wire. Thus, two sets

of Morse signals can be transmitted by two operators over

one line at the same time without interfering with each

other, and not only between terminal offices, but also between

a terminal office and any intermediate office, or between two

intermediate offices alone.







III



AUTOMATIC TELEGRAPHY



FROM the year 1848, when a Scotchman, Alexander Bain,

first devised a scheme for rapid telegraphy by automatic

methods, down to the beginning of the seventies, many other

inventors had also applied themselves to the solution of

this difficult problem, with only indifferent success. "Cheap

telegraphy" being the slogan of the time, Edison became

arduously interested in the subject, and at the end of three

years of hard work produced an entirely successful system,

a public test of which was made on December 11, 1873

when about twelve thousand (12,000) words were transmitted

over a single wire from Washington to New York.

in twenty-two and one-half minutes. Edison's system was

commercially exploited for several years by the Automatic

Telegraph Company, as related in the preceding narrative.



As a premise to an explanation of the principles involved

it should be noted that the transmission of telegraph messages

by hand at a rate of fifty words per minute is considered

a good average speed; hence, the availability of a

telegraph line, as thus operated, is limited to this capacity

except as it may be multiplied by two with the use of the

duplex, or by four, with the quadruplex. Increased rapidity

of transmission may, however, be accomplished by automatic

methods, by means of which, through the employment of

suitable devices, messages may be stamped in or upon a

paper tape, transmitted through automatically acting instruments,

and be received at distant points in visible characters,

upon a similar tape, at a rate twenty or more times

greater--a speed far beyond the possibilities of the human

hand to transmit or the ear to receive.



In Edison's system of automatic telegraphy a paper tape

was perforated with a series of round holes, so arranged and

spaced as to represent Morse characters, forming the words

of the message to be transmitted. This was done in a special

machine of Edison's invention, called a perforator, consisting

of a series of punches operated by a bank of keys--typewriter

fashion. The paper tape passed over a cylinder, and was

kept in regular motion so as to receive the perforations in

proper sequence.



The perforated tape was then placed in the transmitting

instrument, the essential parts of which were a metallic

drum and a projecting arm carrying two small wheels, which,

by means of a spring, were maintained in constant pressure

on the drum. The wheels and drum were electrically connected

in the line over which the message was to be sent.

current being supplied by batteries in the ordinary manner.



When the transmitting instrument was in operation, the

perforated tape was passed over the drum in continuous,

progressive motion. Thus, the paper passed between the

drum and the two small wheels, and, as dry paper is a non-

conductor, current was prevented from passing until a

perforation was reached. As the paper passed along, the wheels

dropped into the perforations, making momentary contacts

with the drum beneath and causing momentary impulses of

current to be transmitted over the line in the same way that

they would be produced by the manipulation of the telegraph

key, but with much greater rapidity. The perforations

being so arranged as to regulate the length of the

contact, the result would be the transmission of long and

short impulses corresponding with the dots and dashes of

the Morse alphabet.



The receiving instrument at the other end of the line was

constructed upon much the same general lines as the transmitter,

consisting of a metallic drum and reels for the paper

tape. Instead of the two small contact wheels, however, a

projecting arm carried an iron pin or stylus, so arranged

that its point would normally impinge upon the periphery

of the drum. The iron pin and the drum were respectively

connected so as to be in circuit with the transmission line

and batteries. As the principle involved in the receiving

operation was electrochemical decomposition, the paper

tape upon which the incoming message was to be received

was moistened with a chemical solution readily decom-

posable by the electric current. This paper, while still in

a damp condition, was passed between the drum and stylus

in continuous, progressive motion. When an electrical impulse

came over the line from the transmitting end, current

passed through the moistened paper from the iron pin, causing

chemical decomposition, by reason of which the iron would

be attacked and would mark a line on the paper. Such a

line would be long or short, according to the duration of the

electric impulse. Inasmuch as a succession of such impulses

coming over the line owed their origin to the perforations

in the transmitting tape, it followed that the resulting

marks upon the receiving tape would correspond thereto in

their respective lengths. Hence, the transmitted message

was received on the tape in visible dots and dashes representing

characters of the Morse alphabet.



The system will, perhaps, be better understood by reference

to the following diagrammatic sketch of its general principles:



Some idea of the rapidity of automatic telegraphy may

be obtained when we consider the fact that with the use

of Edison's system in the early seventies it was common

practice to transmit and receive from three to four thousand

words a minute over a single line between New York and

Philadelphia. This system was exploited through the use

of a moderately paid clerical force.



In practice, there was employed such a number of perforating

machines as the exigencies of business demanded.

Each machine was operated by a clerk, who translated the

message into telegraphic characters and prepared the transmitting

tape by punching the necessary perforations therein.

An expert clerk could perforate such a tape at the rate of

fifty to sixty words per minute. At the receiving end the

tape was taken by other clerks who translated the Morse

characters into ordinary words, which were written on

message blanks for delivery to persons for whom the messages

were intended.



This latter operation--"copying." as it was called--was

not consistent with truly economical business practice.

Edison therefore undertook the task of devising an improved

system whereby the message when received would

not require translation and rewriting, but would automatically

appear on the tape in plain letters and words, ready

for instant delivery.



The result was his automatic Roman letter system, the

basis for which included the above-named general principles

of perforated transmission tape and electrochemical

decomposition. Instead of punching Morse characters in the

transmission tape however, it was perforated with a series

of small round holes forming Roman letters. The verticals

of these letters were originally five holes high. The transmitting

instrument had five small wheels or rollers, instead

of two, for making contacts through the perforations and

causing short electric impulses to pass over the lines. At

first five lines were used to carry these impulses to the

receiving instrument, where there were five iron pins impinging

on the drum. By means of these pins the chemically

prepared tape was marked with dots corresponding to the

impulses as received, leaving upon it a legible record of the

letters and words transmitted.



For purposes of economy in investment and maintenance,

Edison devised subsequently a plan by which the number

of conducting lines was reduced to two, instead of five. The

verticals of the letters were perforated only four holes high,

and the four rollers were arranged in pairs, one pair being

slightly in advance of the other. There were, of course, only

four pins at the receiving instrument. Two were of iron and

two of tellurium, it being the gist of Edison's plan to effect

the marking of the chemical paper by one metal with a

positive current, and by the other metal with a negative

current. In the following diagram, which shows the theory

of this arrangement, it will be seen that both the transmitting

rollers and the receiving pins are arranged in pairs,

one pair in each case being slightly in advance of the other.

Of these receiving pins, one pair--1 and 3--are of iron, and

the other pair--2 and 4--of tellurium. Pins 1-2 and 3-4

are electrically connected together in other pairs, and then

each of these pairs is connected with one of the main lines

that run respectively to the middle of two groups of

batteries at the transmitting end. The terminals of these

groups of batteries are connected respectively to the four

rollers which impinge upon the transmitting drum, the

negatives being connected to 5 and 7, and the positives to 6

and 8, as denoted by the letters N and P. The transmitting

and receiving drums are respectively connected to earth.



In operation the perforated tape is placed on the

transmission drum, and the chemically prepared tape on the

receiving drum. As the perforated tape passes over the

transmission drum the advanced rollers 6 or 8 first close

the circuit through the perforations, and a positive current

passes from the batteries through the drum and down to the

ground; thence through the earth at the receiving end up

to the other drum and back to the batteries via the tellurium

pins 2 or 4 and the line wire. With this positive current the

tellurium pins make marks upon the paper tape, but the

iron pins make no mark. In the merest fraction of a second,

as the perforated paper continues to pass over the transmission

drum, the rollers 5 or 7 close the circuit through

other perforations and t e current passes in the opposite

direction, over the line wire, through pins 1 or 3, and

returns through the earth. In this case the iron pins mark

the paper tape, but the tellurium pins make no mark. It

will be obvious, therefore, that as the rollers are set so as to

allow of currents of opposite polarity to be alternately and

rapidly sent by means of the perforations, the marks upon

the tape at the receiving station will occupy their proper

relative positions, and the aggregate result will be letters

corresponding to those perforated in the transmission tape.



Edison subsequently made still further improvements in

this direction, by which he reduced the number of conducting

wires to one, but the principles involved were analogous

to the one just described.



This Roman letter system was in use for several years on

lines between New York, Philadelphia, and Washington,

and was so efficient that a speed of three thousand words a

minute was attained on the line between the two first-named

cities.



Inasmuch as there were several proposed systems of rapid

automatic telegraphy in existence at the time Edison entered

the field, but none of them in practical commercial

use, it becomes a matter of interest to inquire wherein they

were deficient, and what constituted the elements of Edison's

success.



The chief difficulties in the transmission of Morse

characters had been two in number, the most serious of which

was that on the receiving tape the characters would be

prolonged and run into one another, forming a draggled line and

thus rendering the message unintelligible. This arose from

the fact that, on account of the rapid succession of the electric

impulses, there was not sufficient time between them for

the electric action to cease entirely. Consequently the line

could not clear itself, and became surcharged, as it were;

the effect being an attenuated prolongation of each impulse

as manifested in a weaker continuation of the mark on the

tape, thus making the whole message indistinct. These

secondary marks were called "tailings."



For many years electricians had tried in vain to overcome

this difficulty. Edison devoted a great deal of thought

and energy to the question, in the course of which he

experimented through one hundred and twenty consecutive

nights, in the year 1873, on the line between New York and

Washington. His solution of the problem was simple but

effectual. It involved the principle of inductive compensation.

In a shunt circuit with the receiving instrument he

introduced electromagnets. The pulsations of current

passed through the helices of these magnets, producing an

augmented marking effect upon the receiving tape, but

upon the breaking of the current, the magnet, in discharging

itself of the induced magnetism, would set up momentarily

a counter-current of opposite polarity. This neutralized

the "tailing" effect by clearing the line between

pulsations, thus allowing the telegraphic characters to be

clearly and distinctly outlined upon the tape. Further

elaboration of this method was made later by the addition

of rheostats, condensers, and local opposition batteries on

long lines.



The other difficulty above referred to was one that had

also occupied considerable thought and attention of many

workers in the field, and related to the perforating of the

dash in the transmission tape. It involved mechanical

complications that seemed to be insurmountable, and up to the

time Edison invented his perforating machine no really good

method was available. He abandoned the attempt to cut

dashes as such, in the paper tape, but instead punched three

round holes so arranged as to form a triangle. A concrete

example is presented in the illustration below, which shows

a piece of tape with perforations representing the word

"same."



The philosophy of this will be at once perceived when it

is remembered that the two little wheels running upon the

drum of the transmitting instrument were situated side by

side, corresponding in distance to the two rows of holes.

When a triangle of three holes, intended to form the dash,

reached the wheels, one of them dropped into a lower hole.

Before it could get out, the other wheel dropped into the hole

at the apex of the triangle, thus continuing the connection,

which was still further prolonged by the first wheel dropping

into the third hole. Thus, an extended contact was made,

which, by transmitting a long impulse, resulted in the marking

of a dash upon the receiving tape.



This method was in successful commercial use for some

time in the early seventies, giving a speed of from three to

four thousand words a minute over a single line, but later

on was superseded by Edison's Roman letter system, above

referred to.



The subject of automatic telegraphy received a vast

amount of attention from inventors at the time it was in

vogue. None was more earnest or indefatigable than Edison,

who, during the progress of his investigations, took out

thirty-eight patents on various inventions relating thereto,

some of them covering chemical solutions for the receiving

paper. This of itself was a subject of much importance

and a vast amount of research and labor was expended

upon it. In the laboratory note-books there are recorded

thousands of experiments showing that Edison's investigations

not only included an enormous number of chemical

salts and compounds, but also an exhaustive variety of

plants, flowers, roots, herbs, and barks.



It seems inexplicable at first view that a system of telegraphy

sufficiently rapid and economical to be practically

available for important business correspondence should have

fallen into disuse. This, however, is made clear--so far as

concerns Edison's invention at any rate--in Chapter VIII

of the preceding narrative.







IV



WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY





ALTHOUGH Mr. Edison has taken no active part in the

development of the more modern wireless telegraphy, and

his name has not occurred in connection therewith, the

underlying phenomena had been noted by him many years in

advance of the art, as will presently be explained. The

authors believe that this explanation will reveal a status of

Edison in relation to the subject that has thus far been unknown

to the public.



While the term "wireless telegraphy," as now applied to

the modern method of electrical communication between distant

points without intervening conductors, is self-explanatory,

it was also applicable, strictly speaking, to the previous

art of telegraphing to and from moving trains, and between

points not greatly remote from each other, and not connected

together with wires.



The latter system (described in Chapter XXIII and in a

succeeding article of this Appendix) was based upon the

phenomena of electromagnetic or electrostatic induction between

conductors separated by more or less space, whereby

electric impulses of relatively low potential and low frequency

set up in. one conductor were transmitted inductively

across the air to another conductor, and there received

through the medium of appropriate instruments connected

therewith.



As distinguished from this system, however, modern wireless

telegraphy--so called--has its basis in the utilization of

electric or ether waves in free space, such waves being set up

by electric oscillations, or surgings, of comparatively high

potential and high frequency, produced by the operation of

suitable electrical apparatus. Broadly speaking, these oscillations

arise from disruptive discharges of an induction

coil, or other form of oscillator, across an air-gap, and their

character is controlled by the manipulation of a special type

of circuit-breaking key, by means of which long and short

discharges are produced. The electric or etheric waves

thereby set up are detected and received by another special

form of apparatus more or less distant, without any intervening

wires or conductors.



In November, 1875, Edison, while experimenting in his

Newark laboratory, discovered a new manifestation of electricity

through mysterious sparks which could be produced

under conditions unknown up to that time. Recognizing

at once the absolutely unique character of the phenomena,

he continued his investigations enthusiastically over two

mouths, finally arriving at a correct conclusion as to the

oscillatory nature of the hitherto unknown manifestations.

Strange to say, however, the true import and practical

applicability of these phenomena did not occur to his mind.

Indeed, it was not until more than TWELVE YEARS AFTERWARD,

in 1887, upon the publication of the notable work of Prof.

H. Hertz proving the existence of electric waves in free space,

that Edison realized the fact that the fundamental principle

of aerial telegraphy had been within his grasp in the winter

of 1875; for although the work of Hertz was more profound

and mathematical than that of Edison, the principle involved

and the phenomena observed were practically identical--in

fact, it may be remarked that some of the methods and experimental

apparatus were quite similar, especially the "dark

box" with micrometer adjustment, used by both in observing

the spark.[25]





[25] During the period in which Edison exhibited his lighting system at

the Paris Exposition in 1881, his representative, Mr. Charles Batchelor,

repeated Edison's remarkable experiments of the winter of 1875 for the

benefit of a great number of European savants, using with other apparatus

the original "dark box" with micrometer adjustment.







There is not the slightest intention on the part of the

authors to detract in the least degree from the brilliant work

of Hertz, but, on the contrary, to ascribe to him the honor

that is his due in having given mathematical direction and

certainty to so important a discovery. The adaptation of

the principles thus elucidated and the subsequent development

of the present wonderful art by Marconi, Branly,

Lodge, Slaby, and others are now too well known to call for

further remark at this place.



Strange to say, that although Edison's early experiments

in "etheric force" called forth extensive comment and

discussion in the public prints of the period, they seemed to

have been generally overlooked when the work of Hertz was

published. At a meeting of the Institution of Electrical

Engineers, held in London on May 16, 1889, at which there

was a discussion on the celebrated paper of Prof. (Sir) Oliver

Lodge on "Lightning Conductors," however; the chairman,

Sir William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), made the following

remarks:



"We all know how Faraday made himself a cage six feet

in diameter, hung it up in mid-air in the theatre of the

Royal Institution, went into it, and, as he said, lived in it

and made experiments. It was a cage with tin-foil hanging

all round it; it was not a complete metallic enclosing shell.

Faraday had a powerful machine working in the neighborhood,

giving all varieties of gradual working-up and discharges

by `impulsive rush'; and whether it was a sudden

discharge of ordinary insulated conductors, or of Leyden

jars in the neighborhood outside the cage, or electrification

and discharge of the cage itself, he saw no effects on his

most delicate gold-leaf electroscopes in the interior. His attention

was not directed to look for Hertz sparks, or probably

he might have found them in the interior. Edison seems to

have noticed something of the kind in what he called the

etheric force. His name `etheric' may, thirteen years ago,

have seemed to many people absurd. But now we are all

beginning to call these inductive phenomena `etheric.' "



With these preliminary observations, let us now glance

briefly at Edison's laboratory experiments, of which mention

has been made.



Oh the first manifestation of the unusual phenomena in

November, 1875, Edison's keenness of perception led him

at once to believe that he had discovered a new force. Indeed,

the earliest entry of this discovery in the laboratory

note-book bore that caption. After a few days of further

experiment and observation, however, he changed it to

"Etheric Force," and the further records thereof (all in Mr.

Batchelor's handwriting) were under that heading.



The publication of Edison's discovery created considerable

attention at the time, calling forth a storm of general

ridicule and incredulity. But a few scientific men of the

period, whose experimental methods were careful and exact,

corroborated his deductions after obtaining similar phenomena

by repeating his experiments with intelligent precision.

Among these was the late Dr. George M. Beard, a

noted physicist, who entered enthusiastically into the

investigation, and, in addition to a great deal of independent

experiment, spent much time with Edison at his laboratory.

Doctor Beard wrote a treatise of some length on the subject,

in which he concurred with Edison's deduction that the

phenomena were the manifestation of oscillations, or rapidly

reversing waves of electricity, which did not respond to the

usual tests. Edison had observed the tendency of this force

to diffuse itself in various directions through the air and

through matter, hence the name "Etheric" that he had

provisionally applied to it.



Edison's laboratory notes on this striking investigation

are fascinating and voluminous, but cannot be reproduced

in full for lack of space. In view of the later practical

application of the principles involved, however, the reader will

probably be interested in perusing a few extracts therefrom

as illustrated by facsimiles of the original sketches from the

laboratory note-book.



As the full significance of the experiments shown by these

extracts may not be apparent to a lay reader, it may be

stated by way of premise that, ordinarily, a current only

follows a closed circuit. An electric bell or electric light is a

familiar instance of this rule. There is in each case an open

(wire) circuit which is closed by pressing the button or turning

the switch, thus making a complete and uninterrupted

path in which the current may travel and do its work. Until

the time of Edison's investigations of 1875, now under

consideration, electricity had never been known to manifest

itself except through a closed circuit. But, as the reader

will see from the following excerpts, Edison discovered a

hitherto unknown phenomenon--namely, that under certain

conditions the rule would be reversed and electricity would

pass through space and through matter entirely unconnected

with its point of origin. In other words, he had found the

forerunner of wireless telegraphy. Had he then realized the

full import of his discovery, all he needed was to increase the

strength of the waves and to provide a very sensitive detector,

like the coherer, in order to have anticipated the principal

developments that came many years afterward. With

these explanatory observations, we will now turn to the

excerpts referred to, which are as follows:



"November 22, 1875. New Force.--In experimenting

with a vibrator magnet consisting of a bar of Stubb's steel

fastened at one end and made to vibrate by means of a

magnet, we noticed a spark coming from the cores of the

magnet. This we have noticed often in relays, in stock-

printers, when there were a little iron filings between the

armature and core, and more often in our new electric pen,

and we have always come to the conclusion that it was

caused by strong induction. But when we noticed it on this

vibrator it seemed so strong that it struck us forcibly there

might be something more than induction. We now found

that if we touched any metallic part of the vibrator or magnet

we got the spark. The larger the body of iron touched to

the vibrator the larger the spark. We now connected a

wire to X, the end of the vibrating rod, and we found we

could get a spark from it by touching a piece of iron to it,

and one of the most curious phenomena is that if you turn

the wire around on itself and let the point of the wire touch

any other portion of itself you get a spark. By connecting

X to the gas-pipe we drew sparks from the gas-pipes in any

part of the room by drawing an iron wire over the brass jet

of the cock. This is simply wonderful, and a good proof

that the cause of the spark is a TRUE UNKNOWN FORCE."



"November 23, 1815. New Force.--The following very

curious result was obtained with it. The vibrator shown in

Fig. 1 and battery were placed on insulated stands; and a

wire connected to X (tried both copper and iron) carried

over to the stove about twenty feet distant. When the end

of the wire was rubbed on the stove it gave out splendid

sparks. When permanently connected to the stove, sparks

could be drawn from the stove by a piece of wire held in

the hand. The point X of vibrator was now connected to

the gas-pipe and still the sparks could be drawn from the

stove."



 . . . . . . . . .





"Put a coil of wire over the end of rod X and passed the

ends of spool through galvanometer without affecting it in

any way. Tried a 6-ohm spool add a 200-ohm. We now

tried all the metals, touching each one in turn to the point

X." [Here follows a list of metals and the character of spark

obtained with each.]



 . . . . . . . . .





"By increasing the battery from eight to twelve cells we

get a spark when the vibrating magnet is shunted with 3

ohms. Cannot taste the least shock at B, yet between carbon

points the spark is very vivid. As will be seen, X has no

connection with anything. With a glass rod four feet long, well

rubbed with a piece of silk over a hot stove, with a piece

of battery carbon secured to one end, we received vivid

sparks into the carbon when the other end was held in the

hand with the handkerchief, yet the galvanometer, chemical

paper, the sense of shock in the tongue, and a gold-leaf

electroscope which would diverge at two feet from a half-

inch spark plate-glass machine were not affected in the

least by it.



"A piece of coal held to the wire showed faint sparks.



"We had a box made thus: whereby two points could be

brought together within a dark box provided with an eyepiece.

The points were iron, and we found the sparks were

very irregular. After testing some time two lead-pencils

found more regular and very much more vivid. We then

substituted the graphite points instead of iron."[26]





[26] The dark box had micrometer screws for delicate adjustment of the carbon

points, and was thereafter largely used in this series of investigations for

better study of the spark. When Mr. Edison's experiments were repeated by Mr.

Batchelor, who represented him at the Paris Exposition of 1881, the dark box

was employed for a similar purpose.





 . . . . . . . . .





After recording a considerable number of other experiments,

the laboratory notes go on to state:





"November 30, 1875. Etheric Force.--We found the

addition of battery to the Stubb's wire vibrator greatly

increased the volume of spark. Several persons could obtain

sparks from the gas-pipes at once, each spark being equal

in volume and brilliancy to the spark drawn by a single

person.... Edison now grasped the (gas) pipe, and with the

other hand holding a piece of metal, he touched several

other metallic substances, obtained sparks, showing that the

force passed through his body."



. . . . . . . . .





"December 3, 1875. Etheric Force.--Charley Edison

hung to the gas-pipe with feet above the floor, and with a

knife got a spark from the pipe he was hanging on. We now

took the wire from the vibrator in one hand and stood on a

block of paraffin eighteen inches square and six inches thick;

holding a knife in the other hand, we drew sparks from the

stove-pipe. We now tried the crucial test of passing the

etheric current through the sciatic nerve of a frog just killed.

Previous to trying, we tested its sensibility by the current

from a single Bunsen cell. We put in resistance up to

500,000 ohms, and the twitching was still perceptible. We

tried the induced current from our induction coil having one

cell on primary,, the spark jumping about one-fiftieth of an

inch, the terminal of the secondary connected to the frog

and it straightened out with violence. We arranged frog's

legs to pass etheric force through. We placed legs on an

inverted beaker, and held the two ends of the wires on glass

rods eight inches long. On connecting one to the sciatic

nerve and the other to the fleshy part of the leg no movement

could be discerned, although brilliant sparks could be ob-

tained on the graphite points when the frog was in circuit.

Doctor Beard was present when this was tried."



 . . . . . . . . .





"December 5, 1875. Etheric Force.--Three persons

grasping hands and standing upon blocks of paraffin twelve

inches square and six thick drew sparks from the adjoining

stove when another person touched the sounder with any

piece of metal.... A galvanoscopic frog giving contractions

with one cell through two water rheostats was then placed

in circuit. When the wires from the vibrator and the gas-

pipe were connected, slight contractions were noted, sometimes

very plain and marked, showing the apparent presence

of electricity, which from the high insulation seemed improbable.

Doctor Beard, who was present, inferred from

the way the leg contracted that it moved on both opening

and closing the circuit. To test this we disconnected the

wire between the frog and battery, and placed, instead of a

vibrating sounder, a simple Morse key and a sounder taking

the `etheric' from armature. The spark was now tested in

dark box and found to be very strong. It was then connected

to the nerves of the frog, BUT NO MOVEMENT OF ANY KIND

COULD BE DETECTED UPON WORKING THE KEY, although the brilliancy

and power of the spark were undiminished. The thought

then occurred to Edison that the movement of the frog was

due to mechanical vibrations from the vibrator (which gives

probably two hundred and fifty vibrations per second), passing

through the wires and irritating the sensitive nerves of

the frog. Upon disconnecting the battery wires and holding

a tuning-fork giving three hundred and twenty-six vibrations

per second to the base of the sounder, the vibrations over

the wire made the frog contract nearly every time.... The

contraction of the frog's legs may with considerable safety

be said to be caused by these mechanical vibrations being

transmitted through the conducting wires."



Edison thought that the longitudinal vibrations caused

by the sounder produced a more marked effect, and proceeded

to try out his theory. The very next entry in the

laboratory note-book bears the same date as the above

(December 5, 1875), and is entitled "Longitudinal Vibrations,"

and reads as follows:





"We took a long iron wire one-sixteenth of an inch in diameter

and rubbed it lengthways with a piece of leather with

resin on for about three feet, backward and forward. About

ten feet away we applied the wire to the back of the neck

and it gives a horrible sensation, showing the vibrations

conducted through the wire."



. . . . . . . . .



The following experiment illustrates notably the movement

of the electric waves through free space:





"December 26, 1875. Etheric Force.--An experiment

tried to-night gives a curious result. A is a vibrator, B, C,

D, E are sheets of tin-foil hung on insulating stands. The

sheets are about twelve by eight inches. B and C are

twenty-six inches apart, C and D forty-eight inches and D

and E twenty-six inches. B is connected to the vibrator

and E to point in dark box, the other point to ground. We

received sparks at intervals, although insulated by such

space."





With the above our extracts must close, although we have

given but a few of the interesting experiments tried at the

time. It will be noticed, however, that these records show

much progression in a little over a month. Just after the

item last above extracted, the Edison shop became greatly

rushed on telegraphic inventions, and not many months

afterward came the removal to Menlo Park; hence the

etheric-force investigations were side-tracked for other

matters deemed to be more important at that time.



Doctor Beard in his previously mentioned treatise refers,

on page 27, to the views of others who have repeated Edison's

experiments and observed the phenomena, and in a foot-note

says:





"Professor Houston, of Philadelphia, among others, has

repeated some of these physical experiments, has adopted

in full and after but a partial study of the subject, the

hypothesis of rapidly reversed electricity as suggested in

my letter to the Tribune of December 8th, and further claims

priority of discovery, because he observed the spark of this

when experimenting with a Ruhmkorff coil four years ago.

To this claim, if it be seriously entertained, the obvious reply

is that thousands of persons, probably, had seen this spark

before it was DISCOVERED by Mr. Edison; it had been seen by

Professor Nipher, who supposed, and still supposes, it is the

spark of the extra current; it has been seen by my friend,

Prof. J. E. Smith, who assumed, as he tells me, without

examination, that it was inductive electricity breaking

through bad insulation; it had been seen, as has been stated,

by Mr. Edison many times before he thought it worthy of

study, it was undoubtedly seen by Professor Houston, who,

like so many others, failed to even suspect its meaning and

thus missed an important discovery. The honor of a scientific

discovery belongs, not to him who first sees a thing, but

to him who first sees it with expert eyes; not to him even

who drops an original suggestion, but to him who first makes,

that suggestion fruitful of results. If to see with the eyes

a phenomenon is to discover the law of which that phenomenon

is a part, then every schoolboy who, before the time

of Newton, ever saw an apple fall, was a discoverer of the

law of gravitation...."





Edison took out only one patent on long-distance telegraphy

without wires. While the principle involved therein

(induction) was not precisely analogous to the above, or to

the present system of wireless telegraphy, it was a step forward

in the progress of the art. The application was filed

May 23, 1885, at the time he was working on induction

telegraphy (two years before the publication of the work of

Hertz), but the patent (No. 465,971) was not issued until

December 29, 1891. In 1903 it was purchased from him by

the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company. Edison has always

had a great admiration for Marconi and his work, and

a warm friendship exists between the two men. During the

formative period of the Marconi Company attempts were

made to influence Edison to sell this patent to an opposing

concern, but his regard for Marconi and belief in the

fundamental nature of his work were so strong that he refused

flatly, because in the hands of an enemy the patent might be

used inimically to Marconi's interests.



Edison's ideas, as expressed in the specifications of this

patent, show very clearly the close analogy of his system to

that now in vogue. As they were filed in the Patent Office

several years before the possibility of wireless telegraphy

was suspected, it will undoubtedly be of interest to give the

following extract therefrom:





"I have discovered that if sufficient elevation be obtained

to overcome the curvature of the earth's surface and to reduce

to the minimum the earth's absorption, electric telegraphing

or signalling between distant points can be carried

on by induction without the use of wires connecting such

distant points. This discovery is especially applicable to

telegraphing across bodies of water, thus avoiding the use

of submarine cables, or for communicating between vessels

at sea, or between vessels at sea and points on land, but it

is also applicable to electric communication between distant

points on land, it being necessary, however, on land (with

the exception of communication over open prairie) to increase

the elevation in order to reduce to the minimum the

induction-absorbing effect of houses, trees, and elevations in

the land itself. At sea from an elevation of one hundred

feet I can communicate electrically a great distance, and

since this elevation or one sufficiently high can be had by

utilizing the masts of ships, signals can be sent and received

between ships separated a considerable distance, and by

repeating the signals from ship to ship communication can

be established between points at any distance apart or

across the largest seas and even oceans. The collision of

ships in fogs can be prevented by this character of signalling,

by the use of which, also, the safety of a ship in approaching

a dangerous coast in foggy weather can be assured. In

communicating between points on land, poles of great height

can be used, or captive balloons. At these elevated points,

whether upon the masts of ships, upon poles or balloons,

condensing surfaces of metal or other conductor of electricity

are located. Each condensing surface is connected with

earth by an electrical conducting wire. On land this earth

connection would be one of usual character in telegraphy.

At sea the wire would run to one or more metal plates on

the bottom of the vessel, where the earth connection would

be made with the water. The high-resistance secondary

circuit of an induction coil is located in circuit between the

condensing surface and the ground. The primary circuit of

the induction coil includes a battery and a device for transmitting

signals, which may be a revolving circuit-breaker

operated continually by a motor of any suitable kind, either

electrical or mechanical, and a key normally short-circuiting

the circuit-breaker or secondary coil. For receiving signals

I locate in said circuit between the condensing surface and

the ground a diaphragm sounder, which is preferably one of

my electromotograph telephone receivers. The key normally

short-circuiting the revolving circuit-breaker, no impulses

are produced in the induction coil until the key is

depressed, when a large number of impulses are produced in

the primary, and by means of the secondary corresponding

impulses or variations in tension are produced at the elevated

condensing surface, producing thereat electrostatic impulses.

These electrostatic impulses are transmitted inductively to

the elevated condensing surface at the distant point, and are

made audible by the electromotograph connected in the

ground circuit with such distant condensing surface."





The accompanying illustrations are reduced facsimiles of

the drawings attached to the above patent, No. 465,971.









V



THE ELECTROMOTOGRAPH



IN solving a problem that at the time was thought to be

insurmountable, and in the adaptability of its principles to

the successful overcoming of apparently insuperable difficulties

subsequently arising in other lines of work, this invention

is one of the most remarkable of the many that

Edison has made in his long career as an inventor.



The object primarily sought to be accomplished was the

repeating of telegraphic signals from a distance without the

aid of a galvanometer or an electromagnetic relay, to overcome

the claims of the Page patent referred to in the preceding

narrative. This object was achieved in the device

described in Edison's basic patent No. 158,787, issued

January 19, 1875, by the substitution of friction and anti-

friction for the presence and absence of magnetism in a

regulation relay.



It may be observed, parenthetically, for the benefit of the

lay reader, that in telegraphy the device known as the relay

is a receiving instrument containing an electromagnet

adapted to respond to the weak line-current. Its armature

moves in accordance with electrical impulses, or signals,

transmitted from a distance, and, in so responding, operates

mechanically to alternately close and open a separate local

circuit in which there is a sounder and a powerful battery.

When used for true relaying purposes the signals received

from a distance are in turn repeated over the next section

of the line, the powerful local battery furnishing current for

this purpose. As this causes a loud repetition of the original

signals, it will be seen that relaying is an economic method

of extending a telegraph circuit beyond the natural limits of

its battery power.



At the time of Edison's invention, as related in Chapter

IX of the preceding narrative, there existed no other known

method than the one just described for the repetition of

transmitted signals, thus limiting the application of

telegraphy to the pleasure of those who might own any patent

controlling the relay, except on simple circuits where a

single battery was sufficient. Edison's previous discovery

of differential friction of surfaces through electrochemical

decomposition was now adapted by him to produce motion

at the end of a circuit without the intervention of an electromagnet.

In other words, he invented a telegraph instrument

having a vibrator controlled by electrochemical

decomposition, to take the place of a vibrating armature

operated by an electromagnet, and thus opened an entirely

new and unsuspected avenue in the art.



Edison's electromotograph comprised an ingeniously

arranged apparatus in which two surfaces, normally in contact

with each other, were caused to alternately adhere by

friction or slip by reason of electrochemical decomposition.

One of these surfaces consisted of a small drum or cylinder

of chalk, which was kept in a moistened condition with a

suitable chemical solution, and adapted to revolve

continuously by clockwork. The other surface consisted of a

small pad which rested with frictional pressure on the

periphery of the drum. This pad was carried on the end of a

vibrating arm whose lateral movement was limited between

two adjustable points. Normally, the frictional pressure

between the drum and pad would carry the latter with the

former as it revolved, but if the friction were removed a

spring on the end of the vibrator arm would draw it back to

its starting-place.



In practice, the chalk drum was electrically connected

with one pole of an incoming telegraph circuit, and the

vibrating arm and pad with the other pole. When the drum

rotated, the friction of the pad carried the vibrating arm

forward, but an electrical impulse coming over the line would

decompose the chemical solution with which the drum was

moistened, causing an effect similar to lubrication, and thus

allowing the pad to slip backward freely in response to the

pull of its retractile spring. The frictional movements of

the pad with the drum were comparatively long or short,

and corresponded with the length of the impulses sent in over

the line. Thus, the transmission of Morse dots and dashes

by the distant operator resulted in movements of corresponding

length by the frictional pad and vibrating arm.



This brings us to the gist of the ingenious way in which

Edison substituted the action of electrochemical decomposition

for that of the electromagnet to operate a relay.

The actual relaying was accomplished through the medium

of two contacts making connection with the local or relay

circuit. One of these contacts was fixed, while the other

was carried by the vibrating arm; and, as the latter made

its forward and backward movements, these contacts were

alternately brought together or separated, thus throwing in

and out of circuit the battery and sounder in the local circuit

and causing a repetition of the incoming signals. The

other side of the local circuit was permanently connected to

an insulated block on the vibrator. This device not only

worked with great rapidity, but was extremely sensitive,

and would respond to currents too weak to affect the most

delicate electromagnetic relay. It should be stated that

Edison did not confine himself to the working of the electromotograph

by the slipping of surfaces through the action of

incoming current, but by varying the character of the surfaces

in contact the frictional effect might be intensified by

the electrical current. In such a case the movements would

be the reverse of those above indicated, but the end sought

--namely, the relaying of messages--would be attained with

the same certainty.



While the principal object of this invention was to accomplish

the repetition of signals without the aid of an electromagnetic

relay, the instrument devised by Edison was

capable of use as a recorder also, by employing a small wheel

inked by a fountain wheel and attached to the vibrating arm

through suitable mechanism. By means of this adjunct the

dashes and dots of the transmitted impulses could be recorded

upon a paper ribbon passing continuously over the drum.



The electromotograph is shown diagrammatically in Figs.

1 and 2, in plan and vertical section respectively. The

reference letters in each case indicate identical parts: A

being the chalk drum, B the paper tape, C the auxiliary

cylinder, D the vibrating arm, E the frictional pad, F the

spring, G and H the two contacts, I and J the two wires leading

to local circuit, K a battery, and L an ordinary telegraph

key. The two last named, K and L, are shown to make the

sketch complete but in practice would be at the transmitting

end, which might be hundreds of miles away. It

will be understood, of course, that the electromotograph is

a receiving and relaying instrument.



Another notable use of the electromotograph principle

was in its adaptation to the receiver in Edison's loud-speaking

telephone, on which United States Patent No. 221,957

was issued November 25, 1879. A chalk cylinder moistened

with a chemical solution was revolved by hand or a small

motor. Resting on the cylinder was a palladium-faced pen

or spring, which was attached to a mica diaphragm in a

resonator. The current passed from the main line through

the pen to the chalk and to the battery. The sound-waves

impinging upon the distant transmitter varied the resistance

of the carbon button therein, thus causing corresponding

variations in the strength of the battery current. These

variations, passing through the chalk cylinder produced

more or less electrochemical decomposition, which in turn

caused differences of adhesion between the pen and cylinder

and hence gave rise to mechanical vibrations of the diaphragm

by reason of which the speaker's words were reproduced.

Telephones so operated repeated speaking and

singing in very loud tones. In one instance, spoken words

and the singing of songs originating at a distance were heard

perfectly by an audience of over five thousand people.



The loud-speaking telephone is shown in section,

diagrammatically, in the sketch (Fig. 3), in which A is the chalk

cylinder mounted on a shaft, B. The palladium-faced pen

or spring, C, is connected to diaphragm D. The instrument

in its commercial form is shown in Fig. 4.







VI



THE TELEPHONE



ON April 27, 1877, Edison filed in the United States Patent

Office an application for a patent on a telephone, and on

May 3, 1892, more than fifteen years afterward, Patent No.

474,230 was granted thereon. Numerous other patents have

been issued to him for improvements in telephones, but the

one above specified may be considered as the most important

of them, since it is the one that first discloses the principle

of the carbon transmitter.



This patent embodies but two claims, which are as follows:





"1. In a speaking-telegraph transmitter, the combination

of a metallic diaphragm and disk of plumbago or equivalent

material, the contiguous faces of said disk and diaphragm

being in contact, substantially as described.



"2. As a means for effecting a varying surface contact

in the circuit of a speaking-telegraph transmitter, the combination

of two electrodes, one of plumbago or similar material,

and both having broad surfaces in vibratory contact

with each other, substantially as described."





The advance that was brought about by Edison's carbon

transmitter will be more apparent if we glance first at the

state of the art of telephony prior to his invention.



Bell was undoubtedly the first inventor of the art of transmitting

speech over an electric circuit, but, with his particular

form of telephone, the field was circumscribed. Bell's

telephone is shown in the diagrammatic sectional sketch

(Fig. 1).



In the drawing M is a bar magnet contained in the rubber

case, L. A bobbin, or coil of wire, B, surrounds one end of

the magnet. A diaphragm of soft iron is shown at D, and

E is the mouthpiece. The wire terminals of the coil, B,

connect with the binding screws, C C.



The next illustration shows a pair of such telephones

connected for use, the working parts only being designated by

the above reference letters.



It will be noted that the wire terminals are here put to

their proper uses, two being joined together to form a line

of communication, and the other two being respectively connected

to "ground."



Now, if we imagine a person at each one of the instruments

(Fig. 2) we shall find that when one of them speaks

the sound vibrations impinge upon the diaphragm and cause

it to act as a vibrating armature. By reason of its vibrations,

this diaphragm induces very weak electric impulses

in the magnetic coil. These impulses, according to Bell's

theory, correspond in form to the sound-waves, and, passing

over the line, energize the magnet coil at the receiving end,

thus giving rise to corresponding variations in magnetism

by reason of which the receiving diaphragm is similarly vibrated

so as to reproduce the sounds. A single apparatus

at each end is therefore sufficient, performing the double

function of transmitter and receiver. It will be noticed that

in this arrangement no battery is used The strength of the

impulses transmitted is therefore limited to that of the

necessarily weak induction currents generated by the original

sounds minus any loss arising by reason of resistance in the

line.



Edison's carbon transmitter overcame this vital or limiting

weakness by providing for independent power on the transmission

circuit, and by introducing the principle of varying the

resistance of that circuit with changes in the pressure. With

Edison's telephone there is used a closed circuit on which a

battery current constantly flows, and in that circuit is a

pair of electrodes, one or both of which is carbon. These

electrodes are always in contact with a certain initial pressure,

so that current will be always flowing over the circuit. One

of the electrodes is connected with the diaphragm on which

the sound-waves impinge, and the vibrations of this diaphragm

cause corresponding variations in pressure between

the electrodes, and thereby effect similar variations in the

current which is passing over the line to the receiving end.

This current, flowing around the receiving magnet, causes

corresponding impulses therein, which, acting upon its

diaphragm, effect a reproduction of the original vibrations

and hence of the original sounds.



In other words, the essential difference is that with Bell's

telephone the sound-waves themselves generate the electric

impulses, which are therefore extremely faint. With Edison's

telephone the sound-waves simply actuate an electric

valve, so to speak, and permit variations in a current of any

desired strength.



A second distinction between the two telephones is this:

With the Bell apparatus the very weak electric impulses generated

by the vibration of the transmitting diaphragm pass

over the entire line to the receiving end, and, in consequence,

the possible length of line is limited to a few miles, even

under ideal conditions. With Edison's telephone the battery

current does not flow on the main line, but passes

through the primary circuit of an induction-coil, from the

secondary of which corresponding impulses of enormously

higher potential are sent out on the main line to the receiving

end. In consequence, the line may be hundreds of miles

in length. No modern telephone system is in use to-day

that does not use these characteristic features: the varying

resistance and the induction-coil. The system inaugurated

by Edison is shown by the diagram (Fig. 3), in which the car-

bon transmitter, the induction-coil, the line, and the distant

receiver are respectively indicated.



In Fig. 4 an early form of the Edison carbon transmitter is

represented in sectional view.



The carbon disk is represented by the black portion, E,

near the diaphragm, A, placed between two platinum plates

D and G, which are connected in the battery circuit, as shown

by the lines. A small piece of rubber tubing, B, is attached

to the centre of the metallic diaphragm, and presses lightly

against an ivory piece, F, which is placed directly over one

of the platinum plates. Whenever, therefore, any motion is

given to the diaphragm, it is immediately followed by a

corresponding pressure upon the carbon, and by a change of

resistance in the latter, as described above.



It is interesting to note the position which Edison occupies

in the telephone art from a legal standpoint. To this end

the reader's attention is called to a few extracts from a

decision of Judge Brown in two suits brought in the United

States Circuit Court, District of Massachusetts, by the American

Bell Telephone Company against the National Telephone

Manufacturing Company, et al., and Century Telephone

Company, et al., reported in Federal Reporter, 109, page 976,

et seq. These suits were brought on the Berliner patent,

which, it was claimed, covered broadly the electrical transmission

of speech by variations of pressure between opposing

electrodes in constant contact. The Berliner patent was

declared invalid, and in the course of a long and exhaustive

opinion, in which the state of art and the work of Bell, Edison,

Berliner, and others was fully discussed, the learned Judge

made the following remarks: "The carbon electrode was the

invention of Edison.... Edison preceded Berliner in the transmission

of speech.... The carbon transmitter was an experimental

invention of a very high order of merit.... Edison,

by countless experiments, succeeded in advancing the art.

. . . That Edison did produce speech with solid electrodes

before Berliner is clearly proven.... The use of carbon in a

transmitter is, beyond controversy, the invention of Edison.

Edison was the first to make apparatus in which carbon was

used as one of the electrodes.... The carbon transmitter

displaced Bell's magnetic transmitter, and, under several

forms of construction, remains the only commercial

instrument.... The advance in the art was due to the carbon

electrode of Edison.... It is conceded that the Edison

transmitter as apparatus is a very important invention.... An

immense amount of painstaking and highly ingenious experiment

preceded Edison's successful result. The discovery of

the availability of carbon was unquestionably invention,

and it resulted in the `first practical success in the art.' "







VII



EDISON'S TASIMETER



THIS interesting and remarkable device is one of Edison's

many inventions not generally known to the public at large,

chiefly because the range of its application has been limited

to the higher branches of science. He never applied for a

patent on the instrument, but dedicated it to the public.



The device was primarily intended for use in detecting and

measuring infinitesimal degrees of temperature, however

remote, and its conception followed Edison's researches on

the carbon telephone transmitter. Its principle depends

upon the variable resistance of carbon in accordance with

the degree of pressure to which it is subjected. By means

of this instrument, pressures that are otherwise inappreciable

and undiscoverable may be observed and indicated.



The detection of small variations of temperatures is

brought about through the changes which heat or cold will

produce in a sensitive material placed in contact with a

carbon button, which is put in circuit with a battery and

delicate galvanometer. In the sketch (Fig. 1) there is illustrated,

partly in section, the form of tasimeter which Edison

took with him to Rawlins, Wyoming, in July, 1878, on the

expedition to observe the total eclipse of the sun.



The substance on whose expansion the working of the

instrument depends is a strip of some material extremely

sensitive to heat, such as vulcanite. shown at A, and firmly

clamped at B. Its lower end fits into a slot in a metal plate,

C, which in turn rests upon a carbon button. This latter

and the metal plate are connected in an electric circuit which

includes a battery and a sensitive galvanometer. A vulcanite

or other strip is easily affected by differences of

temperature, expanding and contracting by reason of the

minutest changes. Thus, an infinitesimal variation in its

length through expansion or contraction changes the press-

ure on the carbon and affects the resistance of the circuit

to a corresponding degree, thereby causing a deflection of

the galvanometer; a movement of the needle in one direction

denoting expansion, and in the other contraction. The

strip, A, is first put under a slight pressure, deflecting the

needle a few degrees from zero. Any subsequent expansion

or contraction of the strip may readily be noted by further

movements of the needle. In practice, and for measurements

of a very delicate nature, the tasimeter is inserted in

one arm of a Wheatstone bridge, as shown at A in the

diagram (Fig. 2). The galvanometer is shown at B in the

bridge wire, and at C, D, and E there are shown the resistances

in the other arms of the bridge, which are adjusted to

equal the resistance of the tasimeter circuit. The battery

is shown at F. This arrangement tends to obviate any misleading

deflections that might arise through changes in the battery.



The dial on the front of the instrument is intended to indicate

the exact amount of physical expansion or contraction

of the strip. This is ascertained by means of a micrometer

screw, S, which moves a needle, T, in front of the dial.

This screw engages with a second and similar screw which

is so arranged as to move the strip of vulcanite up or down.

After a galvanometer deflection has been obtained through

the expansion or contraction of the strip by reason of a

change of temperature, a similar deflection is obtained

mechanically by turning the screw, S, one way or the other.

This causes the vulcanite strip to press more or less upon

the carbon button, and thus produces the desired change

in the resistance of the circuit. When the galvanometer

shows the desired deflection, the needle, T, will indicate upon

the dial, in decimal fractions of an inch, the exact distance

through which the strip has been moved.



With such an instrument as the above, Edison demonstrated

the existence of heat in the corona at the above-

mentioned total eclipse of the sun, but exact determinations

could not be made at that time, because the tasimeter adjustment

was too delicate, and at the best the galvanometer

deflections were so marked that they could not be kept

within the limits of the

scale. The sensitiveness

of the instrument may

be easily comprehended

when it is stated that

the heat of the hand

thirty feet away from

the cone-like funnel of

the tasimeter will so

affect the galvanometer

as to cause the spot of

light to leave the scale.



This instrument can also be used to indicate minute changes of

moisture in the air by substituting a strip of gelatine in

place of the vulcanite. When so arranged a moistened

piece of paper held several feet away will cause a minute

expansion of the gelatine strip, which effects a pressure

on the carbon, and causes a variation in the circuit sufficient

to throw the spot of light from the galvanometer mirror off

the scale.



The tasimeter has been used to demonstrate heat from

remote stars (suns), such as Arcturus.







VIII



THE EDISON PHONOGRAPH



THE first patent that was ever granted on a device for

permanently recording the human voice and other sounds, and

for reproducing the same audibly at any future time, was

United States Patent No. 200,251, issued to Thomas A.

Edison on February 19, 1878, the application having been

filed December 24, 1877. It is worthy of note that no references

whatever were cited against the application while

under examination in the Patent Office. This invention

therefore, marked the very beginning of an entirely new

art, which, with the new industries attendant upon its

development, has since grown to occupy a position of worldwide

reputation.



That the invention was of a truly fundamental character

is also evident from the fact that although all "talking-

machines" of to-day differ very widely in refinement from

the first crude but successful phonograph of Edison, their

performance is absolutely dependent upon the employment

of the principles stated by him in his Patent No. 200,251.

Quoting from the specification attached to this patent, we

find that Edison said:



"The invention consists in arranging a plate, diaphragm

or other flexible body capable of being vibrated by the

human voice or other sounds, in conjunction with a material

capable of registering the movements of such vibrating

body by embossing or indenting or altering such material,

in such a manner that such register marks will be sufficient to

cause a second vibrating plate or body to be set in motion

by them, and thus reproduce the motions of the first vibrating

body."



It will be at once obvious that these words describe perfectly

the basic principle of every modern phonograph or

other talking-machine, irrespective of its manufacture or

trade name.



Edison's first model of the phonograph is shown in the

following illustration.



It consisted of a metallic cylinder having a helical indenting

groove cut upon it from end to end. This cylinder was

mounted on a shaft supported on two standards. This

shaft at one end was fitted with a handle, by means of which

the cylinder was rotated. There were two diaphragms, one

on each side of the cylinder, one being for recording and the

other for reproducing speech or other sounds. Each diaphragm

had attached to it a needle. By means of the needle

attached to the recording diaphragm, indentations were

made in a sheet of tin-foil stretched over the peripheral sur-

face of the cylinder when the diaphragm was vibrated by

reason of speech or other sounds. The needle on the other

diaphragm subsequently followed these indentations, thus

reproducing the original sounds.



Crude as this first model appears in comparison with

machines of later development and refinement, it embodied

their fundamental essentials, and was in fact a complete,

practical phonograph from the first moment of its operation.



The next step toward the evolution of the improved phono-

graph of to-day was another form of tin-foil machine, as seen

in the illustration.



It will be noted that this was merely an elaborated form

of the first model, and embodied several mechanical

modifications, among which was the employment of only one

diaphragm for recording and reproducing. Such was the

general type of phonograph used for exhibition purposes in

America and other countries in the three or four years

immediately succeeding the date of this invention.



In operating the machine the recording diaphragm was

advanced nearly to the cylinder, so that as the diaphragm

was vibrated by the voice the needle would prick or indent a

wave-like record in the tin-foil that was on the cylinder. The

cylinder was constantly turned during the recording, and

in turning, was simultaneously moved forward. Thus the

record would be formed on the tin-foil in a continuous spiral

line. To reproduce this record it was only necessary to

again start at the beginning and cause the needle to retrace

its path in the spiral line. The needle, in passing rapidly

in contact with the recorded waves, was vibrated up and

down, causing corresponding vibrations of the diaphragm.

In this way sound-waves similar to those caused by the

original sounds would be set up in the air, thus reproducing

the original speech.



The modern phonograph operates in a precisely similar

way, the only difference being in details of refinement. In-

stead of tin-foil, a wax cylinder is employed, the record being

cut thereon by a cutting-tool attached to a diaphragm, while

the reproduction is effected by means of a blunt stylus

similarly attached.



The cutting-tool and stylus are devices made of sapphire,

a gem next in hardness to a diamond, and they have to be

cut and formed to an exact nicety by means of diamond dust,

most of the work being performed under high-powered

microscopes. The minute proportions of these devices will be

apparent by a glance at the accompanying illustrations, in

which the object on the left represents a

common pin, and the objects on the right

the cutting-tool and reproducing stylus,

all actual sizes.



In the next illustration (Fig. 4) there is

shown in the upper sketch, greatly magnified,

the cutting or recording tool in the

act of forming the record, being vibrated

rapidly by the diaphragm; and in the

lower sketch, similarly enlarged, a representation

of the stylus travelling over the

record thus made, in the act of effecting

a reproduction.



From the late summer of 1878 and to the fall of 1887

Edison was intensely busy on the electric light, electric railway,

and other problems, and virtually gave no attention to

the phonograph. Hence, just

prior to the latter-named period

the instrument was still

in its tin-foil age; but he

then began to devote serious

attention to the development

of an improved type that

should be of greater commercial

importance. The practical

results are too well known

to call for further comment.

That his efforts were not limited

in extent may be inferred

from the fact that since the fall of 1887 to the present

writing he has been granted in the United States one hun-

dred and four patents relating to the phonograph and its

accessories.



Interesting as the numerous inventions are, it would be

a work of supererogation to digest all these patents in the

present pages, as they represent not only the inception but

also the gradual development and growth of the wax-record

type of phonograph from its infancy to the present perfected

machine and records now so widely known all over the world.

From among these many inventions, however, we will select

two or three as examples of ingenuity and importance in their

bearing upon present perfection of results



One of the difficulties of reproduction for many years was

the trouble experienced in keeping the stylus in perfect en-

gagement with the wave-like record, so that every minute

vibration would be reproduced. It should be remembered

that the deepest cut of the recording tool is only about one-

third the thickness of tissue-paper. Hence, it will be quite

apparent that the slightest inequality in the surface of the

wax would be sufficient to cause false vibration, and thus

give rise to distorted effects in such music or other sounds

as were being reproduced. To remedy this, Edison added

an attachment which is called a "floating weight," and is

shown at A in the illustration above.



The function of the floating weight is to automatically keep

the stylus in close engagement with the record, thus insuring

accuracy of reproduction. The weight presses the stylus to

its work, but because of its mass it cannot respond to the

extremely rapid vibrations of the stylus. They are therefore

communicated to the diaphragm.



Some of Edison's most remarkable inventions are revealed

in a number of interesting patents relating to the duplication

of phonograph records. It would be obviously impossible,

from a commercial standpoint, to obtain a musical record

from a high-class artist and sell such an original to the public,

as its cost might be from one hundred to several thousand

dollars. Consequently, it is necessary to provide some way

by which duplicates may be made cheaply enough to permit

their purchase by the public at a reasonable price.



The making of a perfect original musical or other record

is a matter of no small difficulty, as it requires special technical

knowledge and skill gathered from many years of actual

experience; but in the exact copying, or duplication, of such

a record, with its many millions of microscopic waves and

sub-waves, the difficulties are enormously increased. The

duplicates must be microscopically identical with the original,

they must be free from false vibrations or other defects,

although both original and duplicates are of such easily

defacable material as wax; and the process must be cheap and

commercial not a scientific laboratory possibility.



For making duplicates it was obviously necessary to first

secure a mold carrying the record in negative or reversed

form. From this could be molded, or cast, positive copies

which would be identical with the original. While the art

of electroplating would naturally suggest itself as the means

of making such a mold, an apparently insurmountable

obstacle appeared on the very threshold. Wax, being a non-

conductor, cannot be electroplated unless a conducting surface

be first applied. The coatings ordinarily used in electro-

deposition were entirely out of the question on account of

coarseness, the deepest waves of the record being less than

one-thousandth of an inch in depth, and many of them probably

ten to one hundred times as shallow. Edison finally

decided to apply a preliminary metallic coating of infinitesimal

thinness, and accomplished this object by a remarkable

process known as the vacuous deposit. With this he ap-

plied to the original record a film of gold probably no thicker

than one three-hundred-thousandth of an inch, or several

hundred times less than the depth of an average wave.

Three hundred such layers placed one on top of the other

would make a sheet no thicker than tissue-paper.



The process consists in placing in a vacuum two leaves,

or electrodes, of gold, and between them the original record.

A constant discharge of electricity of high tension between

the electrodes is effected by means of an induction-coil. The

metal is vaporized by this discharge, and is carried by it

directly toward and deposited upon the original record, thus

forming the minute film of gold above mentioned. The

record is constantly rotated until its entire surface is coated.

A sectional diagram of the apparatus (Fig. 6.) will aid to a

clearer understanding of this ingenious process.



After the gold film is formed in the manner described

above, a heavy backing of baser metal is electroplated upon

it, thus forming a substantial mold, from which the original

record is extracted by breakage or shrinkage.



Duplicate records in any quantity may now be made from

this mold by surrounding it with a cold-water jacket and

dipping it in a molten wax-like material. This congeals on

the record surface just as melted butter would collect on a

cold knife, and when the mold is removed the surplus wax

falls out, leaving a heavy deposit of the material which forms

the duplicate record. Numerous ingenious inventions have

been made by Edison providing for a variety of rapid and

economical methods of duplication, including methods of

shrinking a newly made copy to facilitate its quick removal

from the mold; methods of reaming, of forming ribs on the

interior, and for many other important and essential details,

which limits of space will not permit of elaboration. Those

mentioned above are but fair examples of the persistent and

effective work he has done to bring the phonograph to its

present state of perfection.



In perusing Chapter X of the foregoing narrative, the

reader undoubtedly noted Edison's clear apprehension of

the practical uses of the phonograph, as evidenced by his

prophetic utterances in the article written by him for the

North American Review in June, 1878. In view of the

crudity of the instrument at that time, it must be acknowl-

edged that Edison's foresight, as vindicated by later events

was most remarkable. No less remarkable was his intensely

practical grasp of mechanical possibilities of future types of

the machine, for we find in one of his early English patents

(No. 1644 of 1878) the disk form of phonograph which, some

ten to fifteen years later, was supposed to be a new development

in the art. This disk form was also covered by Edison's

application for a United States patent, filed in 1879.

This application met with some merely minor technical objections

in the Patent Office, and seems to have passed into

the "abandoned" class for want of prosecution, probably

because of being overlooked in the tremendous pressure

arising from his development of his electric-lighting system.







IX



THE INCANDESCENT LAMP





ALTHOUGH Edison's contributions to human comfort and

progress are extensive in number and extraordinarily vast

and comprehensive in scope and variety, the universal verdict

of the world points to his incandescent lamp and system

of distribution of electrical current as the central and crowning

achievements of his life up to this time. This view

would seem entirely justifiable when we consider the wonderful

changes in the conditions of modern life that have

been brought about by the wide-spread employment of these

inventions, and the gigantic industries that have grown up

and been nourished by their world-wide application. That

he was in this instance a true pioneer and creator is

evident as we consider the subject, for the United States

Patent No. 223,898, issued to Edison on January 27, 1880,

for an incandescent lamp, was of such fundamental character

that it opened up an entirely new and tremendously important

art--the art of incandescent electric lighting. This

statement cannot be successfully controverted, for it has

been abundantly verified after many years of costly litigation.

If further proof were desired, it is only necessary to

point to the fact that, after thirty years of most strenuous

and practical application in the art by the keenest intellects

of the world, every incandescent lamp that has ever since

been made, including those of modern days, is still dependent

upon the employment of the essentials disclosed in the

above-named patent--namely, a filament of high resistance

enclosed in a sealed glass globe exhausted of air, with conducting

wires passing through the glass.



An incandescent lamp is such a simple-appearing article--

merely a filament sealed into a glass globe--that its intrinsic

relation to the art of electric lighting is far from being ap-

parent at sight. To the lay mind it would seem that this

must have been THE obvious device to make in order to obtain

electric light by incandescence of carbon or other material.

But the reader has already learned from the preceding

narrative that prior to its invention by Edison such a device

was NOT obvious, even to the most highly trained experts of

the world at that period; indeed, it was so far from being

obvious that, for some time after he had completed practical

lamps and was actually lighting them up twenty-four

hours a day, such a device and such a result were declared

by these same experts to be an utter impossibility. For a

short while the world outside of Menlo Park held Edison's

claims in derision. His lamp was pronounced a fake, a

myth, possibly a momentary success magnified to the dignity

of a permanent device by an overenthusiastic inventor.



Such criticism, however, did not disturb Edison. He

KNEW that he had reached the goal. Long ago, by a close

process of reasoning, he had clearly seen that the only road

to it was through the path he had travelled, and which was

now embodied in the philosophy of his incandescent lamp--

namely, a filament, or carbon, of high resistance and small

radiating surface, sealed into a glass globe exhausted of air

to a high degree of vacuum. In originally committing himself

to this line of investigation he was well aware that he

was going in a direction diametrically opposite to that followed

by previous investigators. Their efforts had been confined

to low-resistance burners of large radiating surface for

their lamps, but he realized the utter futility of such devices.

The tremendous problems of heat and the prohibitive quantities

of copper that would be required for conductors for

such lamps would be absolutely out of the question in commercial

practice.



He was convinced from the first that the true solution of

the problem lay in a lamp which should have as its illuminating

body a strip of material which would offer such a resistance

to the flow of electric current that it could be raised

to a high temperature--incandescence--and be of such small

cross-section that it would radiate but little heat. At the

same time such a lamp must require a relatively small amount

of current, in order that comparatively small conductors

could be used, and its burner must be capable of withstand-

ing the necessarily high temperatures without disintegration.



It is interesting to note that these conceptions were in

Edison's mind at an early period of his investigations, when

the best expert opinion was that the subdivision of the electric

current was an ignis fatuus. Hence we quote the following

notes he made, November 15, 1878, in one of the

laboratory note-books:





"A given straight wire having 1 ohm resistance and certain

length is brought to a given degree of temperature by

given battery. If the same wire be coiled in such a manner

that but one-quarter of its surface radiates, its temperature

will be increased four times with the same battery, or, one-

quarter of this battery will bring it to the temperature of

straight wire. Or the same given battery will bring a wire

whose total resistance is 4 ohms to the same temperature as

straight wire.



"This was actually determined by trial.



"The amount of heat lost by a body is in proportion to

the radiating surface of that body. If one square inch of

platina be heated to 100 degrees it will fall to, say, zero in one second,

whereas, if it was at 200 degrees it would require two seconds.



"Hence, in the case of incandescent conductors, if the

radiating surface be twelve inches and the temperature on

each inch be 100, or 1200 for all, if it is so coiled or arranged

that there is but one-quarter, or three inches, of radiating

surface, then the temperature on each inch will be 400. If

reduced to three-quarters of an inch it will have on that three-

quarters of an inch 1600 degrees Fahr., notwithstanding the original

total amount was but 1200, because the radiation has been reduced

to three-quarters, or 75 units; hence, the effect of the

lessening of the radiation is to raise the temperature of each

remaining inch not radiating to 125 degrees. If the radiating surface

should be reduced to three-thirty-seconds of an inch, the

temperature would reach 6400 degrees Fahr. To carry out this law

to the best advantage in regard to platina, etc., then with a

given length of wire to quadruple the heat we must lessen the

radiating surface to one-quarter, and to do this in a spiral,

three-quarters must be within the spiral and one-quarter

outside for radiating; hence, a square wire or other means,

such as a spiral within a spiral, must be used. These results

account for the enormous temperature of the Electric Arc

with one horse-power; as, for instance, if one horse-power

will heat twelve inches of wire to 1000 degrees Fahr., and this is

concentrated to have one-quarter of the radiating surface,

it would reach a temperature of 4000 degrees or sufficient to melt it;

but, supposing it infusible, the further concentration to one-

eighth its surface, it would reach a temperature of 16,000 degrees,

and to one-thirty-second its surface, which would be about

the radiating surface of the Electric Arc, it would reach

64,000 degrees Fahr. Of course, when Light is radiated in great

quantities not quite these temperatures would be reached.



"Another curious law is this: It will require a greater

initial battery to bring an iron wire of the same size and

resistance to a given temperature than it will a platina wire

in proportion to their specific heats, and in the case of Carbon,

a piece of Carbon three inches long and one-eighth diameter,

with a resistance of 1 ohm, will require a greater battery

power to bring it to a given temperature than a cylinder

of thin platina foil of the same length, diameter, and resistance,

because the specific heat of Carbon is many times greater;

besides, if I am not mistaken, the radiation of a roughened

body for heat is greater than a polished one like platina."



Proceeding logically upon these lines of thought and

following them out through many ramifications, we have seen

how he at length made a filament of carbon of high resistance

and small radiating surface, and through a concurrent

investigation of the phenomena of high vacua and occluded

gases was able to produce a true incandescent lamp. Not

only was it a lamp as a mere article--a device to give light--

but it was also an integral part of his great and complete

system of lighting, to every part of which it bore a fixed and

definite ratio, and in relation to which it was the keystone

that held the structure firmly in place.



The work of Edison on incandescent lamps did not stop

at this fundamental invention, but extended through more

than eighteen years of a most intense portion of his busy

life. During that period he was granted one hundred and

forty-nine other patents on the lamp and its manufacture.

Although very many of these inventions were of the utmost

importance and value, we cannot attempt to offer a detailed

exposition of them in this necessarily brief article, but must

refer the reader, if interested, to the patents themselves, a

full list being given at the end of this Appendix.

The outline sketch will indicate the principal patents

covering the basic features of the lamp.



The litigation on the Edison lamp patents was one of the

most determined and stubbornly fought contests in the

history of modern jurisprudence. Vast interests were at

stake. All of the technical, expert, and professional skill

and knowledge that money could procure or experience devise

were availed of in the bitter fights that raged in the

courts for many years. And although the Edison interests

had spent from first to last nearly $2,000,000, and had only

about three years left in the life of the fundamental patent,

Edison was thoroughly sustained as to priority by the decisions

in the various suits. We shall offer a few brief extracts

from some of these decisions.



In a suit against the United States Electric Lighting Company,

United States Circuit Court for the Southern District

of New York, July 14, 1891, Judge Wallace said, in his opinion:

"The futility of hoping to maintain a burner in vacuo

with any permanency had discouraged prior inventors, and

Mr. Edison is entitled to the credit of obviating the mechanical

difficulties which disheartened them.... He was

the first to make a carbon of materials, and by a process

which was especially designed to impart high specific resistance

to it; the first to make a carbon in the special form

for the special purpose of imparting to it high total resistance;

and the first to combine such a burner with the necessary adjuncts

of lamp construction to prevent its disintegration and

give it sufficiently long life. By doing these things he made

a lamp which was practically operative and successful, the

embryo of the best lamps now in commercial use, and but

for which the subdivision of the electric light by incandescence

would still be nothing but the ignis fatuus which it

was proclaimed to be in 1879 by some of the reamed experts

who are now witnesses to belittle his achievement and show

that it did not rise to the dignity of an invention.... It is

impossible to resist the conclusion that the invention of the

slender thread of carbon as a substitute for the burners

previously employed opened the path to the practical subdivision

of the electric light."



An appeal was taken in the above suit to the United States

Circuit Court of Appeals, and on October 4, 1892, the decree

of the lower court was affirmed. The judges (Lacombe and

Shipman), in a long opinion reviewed the facts and the art,

and said, inter alia: "Edison's invention was practically

made when he ascertained the theretofore unknown fact that

carbon would stand high temperature, even when very at-

tenuated, if operated in a high vacuum, without the phenomenon

of disintegration. This fact he utilized by the means

which he has described, a lamp having a filamentary carbon

burner in a nearly perfect vacuum."



In a suit against the Boston Incandescent Lamp Company

et al., in the United States Circuit Court for the District

of Massachusetts, decided in favor of Edison on June 11,

1894, Judge Colt, in his opinion, said, among other things:

"Edison made an important invention; he produced the

first practical incandescent electric lamp; the patent is a

pioneer in the sense of the patent law; it may be said that

his invention created the art of incandescent electric lighting."



Opinions of other courts, similar in tenor to the foregoing,

might be cited, but it would be merely in the nature of

reiteration. The above are sufficient to illustrate the direct

clearness of judicial decision on Edison's position as the

founder of the art of electric lighting by incandescence.







EDISON'S DYNAMO WORK



AT the present writing, when, after the phenomenally

rapid electrical development of thirty years, we find on the

market a great variety of modern forms of efficient current

generators advertised under the names of different inventors

(none, however, bearing the name of Edison), a young electrical

engineer of the present generation might well inquire

whether the great inventor had ever contributed anything

to the art beyond a mere TYPE of machine formerly made and

bearing his name, but not now marketed except second hand.



For adequate information he might search in vain the

books usually regarded as authorities on the subject of

dynamo-electric machinery, for with slight exceptions there

has been a singular unanimity in the omission of writers to

give Edison credit for his great and basic contributions to

heavy-current technics, although they have been universally

acknowledged by scientific and practical men to have laid

the foundation for the efficiency of, and to be embodied in

all modern generators of current.



It might naturally be expected that the essential facts of

Edison's work would appear on the face of his numerous

patents on dynamo-electric machinery, but such is not

necessarily the case, unless they are carefully studied in the

light of the state of the art as it existed at the time. While

some of these patents (especially the earlier ones) cover

specific devices embodying fundamental principles that not

only survive to the present day, but actually lie at the foundation

of the art as it now exists, there is no revelation

therein of Edison's preceding studies of magnets, which extended

over many years, nor of his later systematic investigations

and deductions.



Dynamo-electric machines of a primitive kind had been

invented and were in use to a very limited extent for arc

lighting and electroplating for some years prior to the summer

of 1819, when Edison, with an embryonic lighting SYSTEM

in mind, cast about for a type of machine technically and

commercially suitable for the successful carrying out of his

plans. He found absolutely none. On the contrary, all of

the few types then obtainable were uneconomical, indeed

wasteful, in regard to efficiency. The art, if indeed there

can be said to have been an art at that time, was in chaotic

confusion, and only because of Edison's many years' study

of the magnet was he enabled to conclude that insufficiency

in quantity of iron in the magnets of such machines, together

with poor surface contacts, rendered the cost of magnetization

abnormally high. The heating of solid armatures, the

only kind then known, and poor insulation in the commutators,

also gave rise to serious losses. But perhaps the most

serious drawback lay in the high-resistance armature, based

upon the highest scientific dictum of the time that in order

to obtain the maximum amount of work from a machine,

the internal resistance of the armature must equal the resistance

of the exterior circuit, although the application of

this principle entailed the useless expenditure of at least

50 per cent. of the applied energy.



It seems almost incredible that only a little over thirty

years ago the sum of scientific knowledge in regard to dynamo-

electric machines was so meagre that the experts of the

period should settle upon such a dictum as this, but such

was the fact, as will presently appear. Mechanical generators

of electricity were comparatively new at that time;

their theory and practice were very imperfectly understood;

indeed, it is quite within the bounds of truth to say that the

correct principles were befogged by reason of the lack of

practical knowledge of their actual use. Electricians and

scientists of the period had been accustomed for many years

past to look to the chemical battery as the source from

which to obtain electrical energy; and in the practical

application of such energy to telegraphy and kindred uses,

much thought and ingenuity had been expended in studying

combinations of connecting such cells so as to get the

best results. In the text-books of the period it was stated

as a settled principle that, in order to obtain the maximum

work out of a set of batteries, the internal resistance must

approximately equal the resistance of the exterior circuit.

This principle and its application in practice were quite correct

as regards chemical batteries, but not as regards dynamo

machines. Both were generators of electrical current, but

so different in construction and operation, that rules applicable

to the practical use of the one did not apply with

proper commercial efficiency to the other. At the period

under consideration, which may be said to have been just

before dawn of the day of electric light, the philosophy of

the dynamo was seen only in mysterious, hazy outlines--

just emerging from the darkness of departing night. Perhaps

it is not surprising, then, that the dynamo was loosely

regarded by electricians as the practical equivalent of a

chemical battery; that many of the characteristics of performance

of the chemical cell were also attributed to it, and

that if the maximum work could be gotten out of a set of

batteries when the internal and external resistances were

equal (and this was commercially the best thing to do), so

must it be also with a dynamo.



It was by no miracle that Edison was far and away ahead

of his time when he undertook to improve the dynamo. He

was possessed of absolute KNOWLEDGE far beyond that of his

contemporaries. This he ad acquired by the hardest kind

of work and incessant experiment with magnets of all kinds

during several years preceding, particularly in connection

with his study of automatic telegraphy. His knowledge of

magnets was tremendous. He had studied and experimented

with electromagnets in enormous variety, and

knew their peculiarities in charge and discharge, lag, self-

induction, static effects, condenser effects, and the various

other phenomena connected therewith. He had also made

collateral studies of iron, steel, and copper, insulation, winding,

etc. Hence, by reason of this extensive work and knowledge,

Edison was naturally in a position to realize the utter

commercial impossibility of the then best dynamo machine

in existence, which had an efficiency of only about 40 per

cent., and was constructed on the "cut-and-try" principle.



He was also naturally in a position to assume the task he

set out to accomplish, of undertaking to plan and-build an

improved type of machine that should be commercial in hav-

ing an efficiency of at least 90 per cent. Truly a prodigious

undertaking in those dark days, when from the standpoint

of Edison's large experience the most practical and correct

electrical treatise was contained in the Encyclopaedia Britannica,

and in a German publication which Mr. Upton had

brought with him after he had finished his studies with the

illustrious Helmholtz. It was at this period that Mr. Upton

commenced his association with Edison, bringing to the great

work the very latest scientific views and the assistance of

the higher mathematics, to which he had devoted his attention

for several years previously.



As some account of Edison's investigations in this connection

has already been given in Chapter XII of the narrative,

we shall not enlarge upon them here, but quote from

An Historical Review, by Charles L. Clarke, Laboratory

Assistant at Menlo Park, 1880-81; Chief Engineer of the

Edison Electric Light Company, 1881-84:





"In June, 1879, was published the account of the Edison

dynamo-electric machine that survived in the art. This

machine went into extensive commercial use, and was notable

for its very massive and powerful field-magnets and

armature of extremely low resistance as compared with the

combined external resistance of the supply-mains and lamps.

By means of the large masses of iron in the field-magnets,

and closely fitted joints between the several parts thereof,

the magnetic resistance (reluctance) of the iron parts of the

magnetic circuit was reduced to a minimum, and the required

magnetization effected with the maximum economy.

At the same time Mr. Edison announced the commercial

necessity of having the armature of the dynamo of low resistance,

as compared with the external resistance, in order

that a large percentage of the electrical energy developed

should be utilized in the lamps, and only a small percentage

lost in the armature, albeit this procedure reduced the total

generating capacity of the machine. He also proposed to

make the resistance of the supply-mains small, as compared

with the combined resistance of the lamps in multiple arc,

in order to still further increase the percentage of energy

utilized in the lamps. And likewise to this end the combined

resistance of the generator armatures in multiple arc

was kept relatively small by adjusting the number of generators

operating in multiple at any time to the number of lamps

then in use. The field-magnet circuits of the dynamos were

connected in multiple with a separate energizing source;

and the field-current; and strength of field, were regulated

to maintain the required amount of electromotive force

upon the supply-mains under all conditions of load from the

maximum to the minimum number of lamps in use, and to

keep the electromotive force of all machines alike."





Among the earliest of Edison's dynamo experiments were

those relating to the core of the armature. He realized at

once that the heat generated in a solid core was a prolific

source of loss. He experimented with bundles of iron wires

variously insulated, also with sheet-iron rolled cylindrically

and covered with iron wire wound concentrically. These

experiments and many others were tried in a great variety

of ways, until, as the result of all this work, Edison arrived

at the principle which has remained in the art to this day.

He split up the iron core of the armature into thin laminations,

separated by paper, thus practically suppressing Foucault

currents therein and resulting heating effect. It was

in his machine also that mica was used for the first time as

an insulating medium in a commutator.[27]





[27] The commercial manufacture of built-up sheets of mica for electrical

purposes was first established at the Edison Machine Works, Goerck Street,

New York, in 1881.





Elementary as these principles will appear to the modern

student or engineer, they were denounced as nothing short

of absurdity at the time of their promulgation--especially

so with regard to Edison's proposal to upset the then settled

dictum that the armature resistance should be equal to the

external resistance. His proposition was derided in the

technical press of the period, both at home and abroad. As

public opinion can be best illustrated by actual quotation,

we shall present a characteristic instance.





In the Scientific American of October 18, 1879, there appeared

an illustrated article by Mr. Upton on Edison's

dynamo machine, in which Edison's views and claims were

set forth. A subsequent issue contained a somewhat acri-

monious letter of criticism by a well-known maker of dynamo

machines. At the risk of being lengthy, we must quote

nearly all this letter: "I can scarcely conceive it as possible

that the article on the above subject "(Edison's Electric

Generator)" in last week's Scientific American could have

been written from statements derived from Mr. Edison himself,

inasmuch as so many of the advantages claimed for

the machine described and statements of the results obtained

are so manifestly absurd as to indicate on the part of both

writer and prompter a positive want of knowledge of the

electric circuit and the principles governing the construction

and operation of electric machines.



"It is not my intention to criticise the design or construction

of the machine (not because they are not open to

criticism), as I am now and have been for many years engaged

in the manufacture of electric machines, but rather

to call attention to the impossibility of obtaining the described

results without destroying the doctrine of the conservation

and correlation of forces.



 . . . . .



"It is stated that `the internal resistance of the armature'

of this machine `is only  1/2 ohm.' On this fact and the

disproportion between this resistance and that of the external

circuit, the theory of the alleged efficiency of the

machine is stated to be based, for we are informed that,

`while this generator in general principle is the same as in

the best well-known forms, still there is an all-important

difference, which is that it will convert and deliver for useful

work nearly double the number of foot-pounds that any

other machine will under like conditions.' " The writer of

this critical letter then proceeds to quote Mr. Upton's statement

of this efficiency: "`Now the energy converted is distributed

over the whole resistance, hence if the resistance of

the machine be represented by 1 and the exterior circuit by

9, then of the total energy converted nine-tenths will be

useful, as it is outside of the machine, and one-tenth is lost

in the resistance of the machine.'"



After this the critic goes on to say:



"How any one acquainted with the laws of the electric

circuit can make such statements is what I cannot understand.

The statement last quoted is mathematically absurd.

It implies either that the machine is CAPABLE OF INCREASING

ITS OWN ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE NINE TIMES WITHOUT AN INCREASED

EXPENDITURE OF POWER, or that external resistance is

NOT resistance to the current induced in the Edison machine.



"Does Mr. Edison, or any one for him, mean to say that

r/n enables him to obtain nE, and that C IS NOT = E / (r/n + R)?

If so

Mr. Edison has discovered something MORE than perpetual

motion, and Mr. Keely had better retire from the field.



"Further on the writer (Mr. Upton) gives us another example

of this mode of reasoning when, emboldened and

satisfied with the absurd theory above exposed, he endeavors

to prove the cause of the inefficiency of the Siemens and

other machines. Couldn't the writer of the article see that

since C = E/(r + R) that by R/n or by making R = r, the machine

would, according to his theory, have returned more useful

current to the circuit than could be due to the power employed

(and in the ratio indicated), so that there would

actually be a creation of force!

 . . . . . . .



"In conclusion allow me to say that if Mr Edison thinks

he has accomplished so much by the REDUCTION OF THE INTERNAL

RESISTANCE of his machine, that he has much more to do in

this direction before his machine will equal IN THIS RESPECT

others already in the market."



Another participant in the controversy on Edison's generator

was a scientific gentleman, who in a long article published

in the Scientific American, in November, 1879, gravely

undertook to instruct Edison in the A B C of electrical

principles, and then proceeded to demonstrate mathematically

the IMPOSSIBILITY of doing WHAT EDISON HAD ACTUALLY DONE. This

critic concludes with a gentle rebuke to the inventor for ill-

timed jesting, and a suggestion to furnish AUTHENTIC information!



In the light of facts, as they were and are, this article is

so full of humor that we shall indulge in a few quotations

It commences in A B C fashion as follows: "Electric machines

convert mechanical into electrical energy.... The

ratio of yield to consumption is the expression of the efficiency

of the machine.... How many foot-pounds of elec-

tricity can be got out of 100 foot-pounds of mechanical

energy? Certainly not more than 100: certainly less....

The facts and laws of physics, with the assistance of mathematical

logic, never fail to furnish precious answers to

such questions."



The would-be critic then goes on to tabulate tests of certain

other dynamo machines by a committee of the Franklin

Institute in 1879, the results of which showed that these

machines returned about 50 per cent. of the applied mechanical

energy, ingenuously remarking: "Why is it that

when we have produced the electricity, half of it must slip

away? Some persons will be content if they are told simply

that it is a way which electricity has of behaving. But there

is a satisfactory rational explanation which I believe can be

made plain to persons of ordinary intelligence. It ought to

be known to all those who are making or using machines.

I am grieved to observe that many persons who talk and

write glibly about electricity do not understand it; some even

ignore or deny the fact to be explained."



Here follows HIS explanation, after which he goes on to

say: "At this point plausibly comes in a suggestion that the

internal part of the circuit be made very small and the external

part very large. Why not (say) make the internal

part 1 and the external 9, thus saving nine-tenths and losing

only one-tenth? Unfortunately, the suggestion is not practical;

a fallacy is concealed in it."



He then goes on to prove his case mathematically, to his

own satisfaction, following it sadly by condoling with and

a warning to Edison: "But about Edison's electric generator!

. . . No one capable of making the improvements in the

telegraph and telephone, for which we are indebted to Mr.

Edison, could be other than an accomplished electrician.

His reputation as a scientist, indeed, is smirched by the newspaper

exaggerations, and no doubt he will be more careful

in future. But there is a danger nearer home, indeed, among

his own friends and in his very household.



". . . The writer of page 242" (the original article) "is

probably a friend of Mr. Edison, but possibly, alas! a wicked

partner. Why does he say such things as these? `Mr. Edison

claims that he realizes 90 per cent. of the power applied

to this machine in external work.' . . . Perhaps the writer

is a humorist, and had in his mind Colonel Sellers, etc.,

which he could not keep out of a serious discussion; but

such jests are not good.



"Mr. Edison has built a very interesting machine, and he

has the opportunity of making a valuable contribution to

the electrical arts by furnishing authentic accounts of its

capabilities."



The foregoing extracts are unavoidably lengthy, but,

viewed in the light of facts, serve to illustrate most clearly

that Edison's conceptions and work were far and away ahead

of the comprehension of his contemporaries in the art, and

that his achievements in the line of efficient dynamo design

and construction were indeed truly fundamental and revolutionary

in character. Much more of similar nature to the

above could be quoted from other articles published elsewhere,

but the foregoing will serve as instances generally

representing all. In the controversy which appeared in the

columns of the Scientific American, Mr. Upton, Edison's

mathematician, took up the question on his side, and answered

the critics by further elucidations of the principles

on which Edison had founded such remarkable and radical

improvements in the art. The type of Edison's first dynamo-

electric machine, the description of which gave rise to the

above controversy, is shown in Fig. 1.



Any account of Edison's work on the dynamo would be

incomplete did it omit to relate his conception and construction

of the great direct-connected steam-driven generator

that was the prototype of the colossal units which are

used throughout the world to-day.



In the demonstrating plant installed and operated by him

at Menlo Park in 1880 ten dynamos of eight horse-power

each were driven by a slow-speed engine through a complicated

system of counter-shafting, and, to quote from Mr.

Clarke's Historical Review, "it was found that a considerable

percentage of the power of the engine was necessarily wasted

in friction by this method of driving, and to prevent this

waste and thus increase the economy of his system, Mr. Edison

conceived the idea of substituting a single large dynamo

for the several small dynamos, and directly coupling it with

the driving engine, and at the same time preserve the requisite

high armature speed by using an engine of the high-

speed type. He also expected to realize still further gains

in economy from the use of a large dynamo in place of several

small machines by a more than correspondingly lower

armature resistance, less energy for magnetizing the field,

and for other minor reasons. To the same end, he intended

to supply steam to the engine under a much higher boiler

pressure than was customary in stationary-engine driving

at that time."



The construction of the first one of these large machines

was commenced late in the year 1880. Early in 1881 it was

completed and tested, but some radical defects in armature

construction were developed, and it was also demonstrated

that a rate of engine speed too high for continuously safe

and economical operation had been chosen. The machine

was laid aside. An accurate illustration of this machine, as

it stood in the engine-room at Menlo Park, is given in Van

Nostrand's Engineering Magazine, Vol. XXV, opposite page

439, and a brief description is given on page 450.



With the experience thus gained, Edison began, in the

spring of 1881, at the Edison Machine Works, Goerck Street,

New York City, the construction of the first successful machine

of this type. This was the great machine known as

"Jumbo No. 1," which is referred to in the narrative as having

been exhibited at the Paris International Electrical Exposition,

where it was regarded as the wonder of the electrical

world. An intimation of some of the tremendous difficulties

encountered in the construction of this machine has already

been given in preceding pages, hence we shall not now enlarge

on the subject, except to note in passing that the terribly

destructive effects of the spark of self-induction and

the arcing following it were first manifested in this powerful

machine, but were finally overcome by Edison after a strenuous

application of his powers to the solution of the problem.



It may be of interest, however, to mention some of its

dimensions and electrical characteristics, quoting again from

Mr. Clarke: "The field-magnet had eight solid cylindrical

cores, 8 inches in diameter and 57 inches long, upon each of

which was wound an exciting-coil of 3.2 ohms resistance,

consisting of 2184 turns of No. 10 B. W. G. insulated copper

wire, disposed in six layers. The laminated iron core of the

armature, formed of thin iron disks, was 33 3/4 inches long,

and had an internal diameter of 12 1/2 inches, and an external

diameter of 26 7/16 inches. It was mounted on a 6-inch shaft.

The field-poles were 33 3/4 inches long, and 27 1/2 inches inside

diameter The armature winding consisted of 146 copper

bars on the face of the core, connected into a closed-coil

winding by means of 73 copper disks at each end of the core.

The cross-sectional area of each bar was 0.2 square inch

their average length was 42.7 inches, and the copper end-

disks were 0.065 inch thick. The commutator had 73 sec-

tions. The armature resistance was 0.0092 ohm,[28] of which

0.0055 ohm was in the armature bars and 0.0037 ohm in the

end-disks." An illustration of the next latest type of this

machine is presented in Fig. 2.





[28] Had Edison in Upton's Scientific American article in 1879 proposed

such an exceedingly low armature resistance for this immense generator

(although its ratio was proportionate to the original machine),

his critics might probably have been sufficiently indignant

as to be unable to express themselves coherently.





The student may find it interesting to look up Edison's

United States Patents Nos. 242,898, 263,133, 263,146, and

246,647, bearing upon the construction of the "Jumbo";

also illustrated articles in the technical journals of the time,

among which may be mentioned: Scientific American, Vol.

XLV, page 367; Engineering, London, Vol. XXXII, pages

409 and 419, The Telegraphic Journal and Electrical Review,

London, Vol. IX, pages 431-433, 436-446; La Nature, Paris,

9th year, Part II, pages 408-409; Zeitschrift fur Angewandte

Elektricitaatslehre, Munich and Leipsic, Vol. IV, pages 4-14;

and Dredge's Electric Illumination, 1882, Vol. I, page 261.



The further development of these great machines later on,

and their extensive practical use, are well known and need

no further comment, except in passing it may be noted that

subsequent machines had each a capacity of 1200 lamps of

16 candle-power, and that the armature resistance was still

further reduced to 0.0039 ohm.



Edison's clear insight into the future, as illustrated by his

persistent advocacy of large direct-connected generating

units, is abundantly vindicated by present-day practice.

His Jumbo machines, of 175 horse-power, so enormous for

their time, have served as prototypes, and have been succeeded

by generators which have constantly grown in size

and capacity until at this time (1910) it is not uncommon

to employ such generating units of a capacity of 14,000 kilowatts,

or about 18,666 horse-power.



We have not entered into specific descriptions of the

many other forms of dynamo machines invented by Edison,

such as the multipolar, the disk dynamo, and the armature

with two windings, for sub-station distribution; indeed, it is

not possible within our limited space to present even a brief

digest of Edison's great and comprehensive work on the

dynamo-electric machine, as embodied in his extensive ex-

periments and in over one hundred patents granted to him.

We have, therefore, confined ourselves to the indication of

a few salient and basic features, leaving it to the interested

student to examine the patents and the technical literature

of the long period of time over which Edison's labors

were extended.



Although he has not given any attention to the subject

of generators for many years, an interesting instance of his

incisive method of overcoming minor difficulties occurred

while the present volumes were under preparation (1909).

Carbon for commutator brushes has been superseded by

graphite in some cases, the latter material being found much

more advantageous, electrically. Trouble developed, however,

for the reason that while carbon was hard and would

wear away the mica insulation simultaneously with the

copper, graphite, being softer, would wear away only the

copper, leaving ridges of mica and thus causing sparking

through unequal contact. At this point Edison was asked

to diagnose the trouble and provide a remedy. He suggested

the cutting out of the mica pieces almost to the bottom,

leaving the commutator bars separated by air-spaces.

This scheme was objected to on the ground that particles

of graphite would fill these air-spaces and cause a short-

circuit. His answer was that the air-spaces constituted the

value of his plan, as the particles of graphite falling into them

would be thrown out by the action of centrifugal force as the

commutator revolved. And thus it occurred as a matter of

fact, and the trouble was remedied. This idea was subsequently

adopted by a great manufacturer of generators.







XI



THE EDISON FEEDER SYSTEM



TO quote from the preamble of the specifications of United

States Patent No. 264,642, issued to Thomas A. Edison

September 19, 1882: "This invention relates to a method

of equalizing the tension or `pressure' of the current through

an entire system of electric lighting or other translation of

electric force, preventing what is ordinarily known as a

`drop' in those portions of the system the more remote from

the central station...."



The problem which was solved by the Edison feeder

system was that relating to the equal distribution of current

on a large scale over extended areas, in order that a constant

and uniform electrical pressure could be maintained in every

part of the distribution area without prohibitory expenditure

for copper for mains and conductors.



This problem had a twofold aspect, although each side

was inseparably bound up in the other. On the one hand

it was obviously necessary in a lighting system that each

lamp should be of standard candle-power, and capable of

interchangeable use on any part of the system, giving the

same degree of illumination at every point, whether near to

or remote from the source of electrical energy. On the other

hand, this must be accomplished by means of a system of

conductors so devised and arranged that while they would

insure the equal pressure thus demanded, their mass and

consequent cost would not exceed the bounds of practical

and commercially economical investment.



The great importance of this invention can be better understood

and appreciated by a brief glance at the state of the

art in 1878-79, when Edison was conducting the final series

of investigations which culminated in his invention of the

incandescent lamp and SYSTEM of lighting. At this time, and

for some years previously, the scientific world had been working

on the "subdivision of the electric light," as it was then

termed. Some leading authorities pronounced it absolutely

impossible of achievement on any extended scale, while a

very few others, of more optimistic mind, could see no gleam

of light through the darkness, but confidently hoped for

future developments by such workers as Edison.



The earlier investigators, including those up to the period

above named, thought of the problem as involving the subdivision

of a FIXED UNIT of current, which, being sufficient to

cause illumination by one large lamp, might be divided into

a number of small units whose aggregate light would equal

the candle-power of this large lamp. It was found, however,

in their experiments that the contrary effect was produced,

for with every additional lamp introduced in the

circuit the total candle-power decreased instead of increasing.

If they were placed in series the light varied inversely as

the SQUARE of the number of lamps in circuit; while if they

were inserted in multiple arc, the light diminished as the

CUBE of the number in circuit.[29] The idea of maintaining a

constant potential and of PROPORTIONING THE CURRENT to the

number of lamps in circuit did not occur to most of these

early investigators as a feasible method of overcoming the

supposed difficulty.





[29] M. Fontaine, in his book on Electric Lighting (1877), showed that with

the current of a battery composed of sixteen elements, one lamp gave an

illumination equal to 54 burners; whereas two similar lamps, if introduced

in parallel or multiple arc, gave the light of only 6 1/2 burners in all;

three lamps of only 2 burners in all; four lamps of only 3/4 of one burner,

and five lamps of  1/4  of a burner.





It would also seem that although the general method of

placing experimental lamps in multiple arc was known at

this period, the idea of "drop" of electrical pressure was

imperfectly understood, if, indeed, realized at all, as a most

important item to be considered in attempting the solution

of the problem. As a matter of fact, the investigators preceding

Edison do not seem to have conceived the idea of a

"system" at all; hence it is not surprising to find them far

astray from the correct theory of subdivision of the electric

current. It may easily be believed that the term "subdivision"

was a misleading one to these early experimenters.

For a very short time Edison also was thus misled, but as

soon as he perceived that the problem was one involving the

MULTIPLICATION OF CURRENT UNITS, his broad conception of a

"system" was born.



Generally speaking, all conductors of electricity offer more

or less resistance to the passage of current through them

and in the technical terminology of electrical science the

word "drop" (when used in reference to a system of distribution)

is used to indicate a fall or loss of initial electrical

pressure arising from the resistance offered by the copper

conductors leading from the source of energy to the lamps.

The result of this resistance is to convert or translate a

portion of the electrical energy into another form--namely,

heat, which in the conductors is USELESS and wasteful and to

some extent inevitable in practice, but is to be avoided and

remedied as far as possible.



It is true that in an electric-lighting system there is also

a fall or loss of electrical pressure which occurs in overcoming

the much greater resistance of the filament in an

incandescent lamp. In this case there is also a translation

of the energy, but here it accomplishes a USEFUL purpose, as

the energy is converted into the form of light through the

incandescence of the filament. Such a conversion is called

"work" as distinguished from "drop," although a fall of

initial electrical pressure is involved in each case.



The percentage of "drop" varies according to the quantity

of copper used in conductors, both as to cross-section and

length. The smaller the cross-sectional area, the greater the

percentage of drop. The practical effect of this drop would

be a loss of illumination in the lamps as we go farther away

from the source of energy. This may be illustrated by a

simple diagram in which G is a generator, or source of energy,

furnishing current at a potential or electrical pressure of

110 volts; 1 and 2 are main conductors, from which 110-volt

lamps, L, are taken in derived circuits. It will be understood

that the circuits represented in Fig. 1 are theoretically

supposed to extend over a large area. The main conductors

are sufficiently large in cross-section to offer but little

resistance in those parts which are comparatively near the

generator, but as the current traverses their extended

length there is a gradual increase of resistance to overcome,

and consequently the drop increases, as shown by the figures.

The result of the drop in such a case would be that while the

two lamps, or groups, nearest the generator would be burning

at their proper degree of illumination, those beyond would

give lower and lower candle-power, successively, until the

last lamp, or group, would be giving only about two-thirds

the light of the first two. In other words, a very slight drop

in voltage means a disproportionately great loss in illumination.

Hence, by using a primitive system of distribution,

such as that shown by Fig. 1, the initial voltage would have

to be so high, in order to obtain the proper candle-power at

the end of the circuit, that the lamps nearest the generator

would be dangerously overheated. It might be suggested

as a solution of this problem that lamps of different voltages

could be used. But, as we are considering systems of extended

distribution employing vast numbers of lamps (as in

New York City, where millions are in use), it will be seen that

such a method would lead to inextricable confusion, and

therefore be absolutely out of the question. Inasmuch as

the percentage of drop decreases in proportion to the increased

cross-section of the conductors, the only feasible plan

would seem to be to increase their size to such dimensions

as to eliminate the drop altogether, beginning with conductors

of large cross-section and tapering off as necessary.

This would, indeed, obviate the trouble, but, on the other

hand, would give rise to a much more serious difficulty--

namely, the enormous outlay for copper; an outlay so great

as to be absolutely prohibitory in considering the electric

lighting of large districts, as now practiced.



Another diagram will probably make this more clear.

The reference figures are used as before, except that the

horizontal lines extending from square marked G represent

the main conductors. As each lamp requires and takes its

own proportion of the total current generated, it is obvious

that the size of the conductors to carry the current for a

number of lamps must be as large as the sum of ALL the

separate conductors which would be required to carry the

necessary amount of current to each lamp separately.

Hence, in a primitive multiple-arc system, it was found that

the system must have conductors of a size equal to the

aggregate of the individual conductors necessary for every

lamp. Such conductors might either be separate, as shown

above (Fig. 2), or be bunched together, or made into a solid

tapering conductor, as shown in the following figure:



The enormous mass of copper needed in such a system

can be better appreciated by a concrete example. Some

years ago Mr. W. J. Jenks made a comparative calculation

which showed that such a system of conductors (known as

the "Tree" system), to supply 8640 lamps in a territory

extending over so small an area as nine city blocks, would

require 803,250 pounds of copper, which at the then price of

25 cents per pound would cost $200,812.50!



Such, in brief, was the state of the art, generally speaking,

at the period above named (1878-79). As early in the art

as the latter end of the year 1878, Edison had developed his

ideas sufficiently to determine that the problem of electric

illumination by small units could be solved by using incandescent

lamps of high resistance and small radiating surface,

and by distributing currents of constant potential

thereto in multiple arc by means of a ramification of conductors,

starting from a central source and branching therefrom

in every direction. This was an equivalent of the

method illustrated in Fig. 3, known as the "Tree" system,

and was, in fact, the system used by Edison in the first and

famous exhibition of his electric light at Menlo Park around

the Christmas period of 1879. He realized, however, that

the enormous investment for copper would militate against

the commercial adoption of electric lighting on an extended

scale. His next inventive step covered the division of a large

city district into a number of small sub-stations supplying

current through an interconnected network of conductors, thus

reducing expenditure for copper to some extent, because each

distribution unit was small and limited the drop.



His next development was the radical advancement of the

state of the art to the feeder system, covered by the patent

now under discussion. This invention swept away the tree and

other systems, and at one bound brought into being the possibility

of effectively distributing large currents over extended

areas with a commercially reasonable investment for copper.



The fundamental principles of this invention were, first,

to sever entirely any direct connection of the main conductors

with the source of energy; and, second, to feed current

at a constant potential to central points in such main

conductors by means of other conductors, called "feeders,"

which were to be connected directly with the source of energy

at the central station. This idea will be made more clear by

reference to the following simple diagram, in which the same

letters are used as before, with additions:



In further elucidation of the diagram, it may be considered

that the mains are laid in the street along a city

block, more or less distant from the station, while the feeders

are connected at one end with the source of energy at the

station, their other extremities being connected to the mains

at central points of distribution. Of course, this system

was intended to be applied in every part of a district to be

supplied with current, separate sets of feeders running out

from the station to the various centres. The distribution

mains were to be of sufficiently large size that between their

most extreme points the loss would not be more than 3 volts.

Such a slight difference would not make an appreciable

variation in the candle-power of the lamps.



By the application of these principles, the inevitable but

useless loss, or "drop," required by economy might be incurred,

but was LOCALIZED IN THE FEEDERS, where it would not

affect the uniformity of illumination of the lamps in any of

the circuits, whether near to or remote from the station,

because any variations of loss in the feeders would not give

rise to similar fluctuations in any lamp circuit. The feeders

might be operated at any desired percentage of loss that

would realize economy in copper, so long as they delivered

current to the main conductors at the potential represented

by the average voltage of the lamps.



Thus the feeders could be made comparatively small in

cross-section. It will be at once appreciated that, inasmuch

as the mains required to be laid ONLY along the blocks to be

lighted, and were not required to be run all the way to the

central station (which might be half a mile or more away),

the saving of copper by Edison's feeder system was enormous.

Indeed, the comparative calculation of Mr. Jenks,

above referred to, shows that to operate the same number

of lights in the same extended area of territory, the feeder

system would require only 128,739 pounds of copper, which,

at the then price of 25 cents per pound, would cost only

$39,185, or A SAVING of $168,627.50 for copper in this very

small district of only nine blocks.



An additional illustration, appealing to the eye, is

presented in the following sketch, in which the comparative

masses of copper of the tree and feeder systems for carrying

the same current are shown side by side:







XII



THE THREE-WIRE SYSTEM



THIS invention is covered by United States Patent No.

274,290, issued to Edison on March 20, 1883. The object

of the invention was to provide for increased economy in the

quantity of copper employed for the main conductors in

electric light and power installations of considerable extent

at the same time preserving separate and independent control

of each lamp, motor, or other translating device, upon

any one of the various distribution circuits.



Immediately prior to this invention the highest state of

the art of electrical distribution was represented by Edison's

feeder system, which has already been described as a straight

parallel or multiple-arc system wherein economy of copper

was obtained by using separate sets of conductors--minus

load--feeding current at standard potential or electrical

pressure into the mains at centres of distribution.



It should be borne in mind that the incandescent lamp

which was accepted at the time as a standard (and has so

remained to the present day) was a lamp of 110 volts or

thereabouts. In using the word "standard," therefore, it

is intended that the same shall apply to lamps of about that

voltage, as well as to electrical circuits of the approximate

potential to operate them.



Briefly stated, the principle involved in the three-wire

system is to provide main circuits of double the standard

potential, so as to operate standard lamps, or other translating

devices, in multiple series of two to each series; and

for the purpose of securing independent, individual control

of each unit, to divide each main circuit into any desired

number of derived circuits of standard potential (properly

balanced) by means of a central compensating conductor

which would be normally neutral, but designed to carry any

minor excess of current that might flow by reason of any

temporary unbalancing of either side of the main circuit.



Reference to the following diagrams will elucidate this

principle more clearly than words alone can do. For the

purpose of increased lucidity we will first show a plain

multiple-series system.



In this diagram G<1S> and G<2S> represent two generators, each

producing current at a potential of 110 volts. By connect-

ing them in series this potential is doubled, thus providing

a main circuit (P and N) of 220 volts. The figures marked

L represent eight lamps of 110 volts each, in multiple series

of two, in four derived circuits. The arrows indicate the

flow of current. By this method each pair of lamps takes,

together, only the same quantity or volume of current

required by a single lamp in a simple multiple-arc system;

and, as the cross-section of a conductor depends upon the

quantity of current carried, such an arrangement as the

above would allow the use of conductors of only one-fourth

the cross-section that would be otherwise required. From

the standpoint of economy of investment such an arrangement

would be highly desirable, but considered commercially

it is impracticable because the principle of independent

control of each unit would be lost, as the turning out of a lamp

in any series would mean the extinguishment of its

companion also. By referring to the diagram it will be seen

that each series of two forms one continuous path between

the main conductors, and if this path be broken at any one

point current will immediately cease to flow in that particular

series.



Edison, by his invention of the three-wire system, over-

came this difficulty entirely, and at the same time conserved

approximately, the saving of copper, as will be apparent

from the following illustration of that system, in its simplest

form.



The reference figures are similar to those in the preceding

diagram, and all conditions are also alike except that a

central compensating, or balancing, conductor, PN, is here

introduced. This is technically termed the "neutral" wire,

and in the discharge of its functions lies the solution of the

problem of economical distribution. Theoretically, a three-

wire installation is evenly balanced by wiring for an equal

number of lamps on both sides. If all these lamps were

always lighted, burned, and extinguished simultaneously the

central conductor would, in fact, remain neutral, as there

would be no current passing through it, except from lamp

to lamp. In practice, however, no such perfect conditions

can obtain, hence the necessity of the provision for balancing

in order to maintain the principle of independent control of

each unit.



It will be apparent that the arrangement shown in Fig. 2

comprises practically two circuits combined in one system,

in which the central conductor, PN, in case of emergency,

serves in two capacities--namely, as negative to generator

G<1S> or as positive to generator G<2S>, although normally neutral.

There are two sides to the system, the positive side being

represented by the conductors P and PN, and the negative

side by the conductors PN and N. Each side, if considered

separately, has a potential of about 110 volts, yet the potential

of the two outside conductors, P and N, is 220 volts.

The lamps are 110 volts.



In practical use the operation of the system is as follows:

If all the lamps were lighted the current would flow along

P and through each pair of lamps to N, and so back to the

source of energy. In this case the balance is preserved and

the central wire remains neutral, as no return current flows

through it to the source of energy. But let us suppose that

one lamp on the positive side is extinguished. None of the

other lamps is affected thereby, but the system is immediately

thrown out of balance, and on the positive side there

is an excess of current to this extent which flows along or

through the central conductor and returns to the generator,

the central conductor thus becoming the negative of that

side of the system for the time being. If the lamp extinguished

had been one of those on the negative side of the

system results of a similar nature would obtain, except that

the central conductor would for the time being become the

positive of that side, and the excess of current would flow

through the negative, N, back to the source of energy. Thus

it will be seen that a three-wire system, considered as a

whole, is elastic in that it may operate as one when in balance

and as two when unbalanced, but in either event giving independent

control of each unit.



For simplicity of illustration a limited number of circuits,

shown in Fig. 2, has been employed. In practice, however,

where great numbers of lamps are in use (as, for instance,

in New York City, where about 7,000,000 lamps are operated

from various central stations), there is constantly occurring

more or less change in the balance of many circuits extending

over considerable distances, but of course there is a net

result which is always on one side of the system or the other

for the time being, and this is met by proper adjustment at

the appropriate generator in the station.



In order to make the explanation complete, there is presented

another diagram showing a three-wire system unbalanced:



The reference figures are used as before, but in this case

the vertical lines represent branches taken from the main

conductors into buildings or other spaces to be lighted, and

the loops between these branch wires represent lamps in

operation. It will be seen from this sketch that there are

ten lamps on the positive side and twelve on the negative

side. Hence, the net result is an excess of current equal

to that required by two lamps flowing through the central

or compensating conductor, which is now acting as positive

to generator G<2S> The arrows show the assumed direction of

flow of current throughout the system, and the small figures

at the arrow-heads the volume of that current expressed in

the number of lamps which it supplies.



The commercial value of this invention may be appreciated

from the fact that by the application of its principles

there is effected a saving of 62 1/2 per cent. of the amount of

copper over that which would be required for conductors

in any previously devised two-wire system carrying the same

load. This arises from the fact that by the doubling of

potential the two outside mains are reduced to one-quarter

the cross-section otherwise necessary. A saving of 75 per

cent. would thus be assured, but the addition of a third, or

compensating, conductor of the same cross-section as one

of the outside mains reduces the total saving to 62 1/2 per cent.



The three-wire system is in universal use throughout the

world at the present day.







XIII



EDISON'S ELECTRIC RAILWAY



AS narrated in Chapter XVIII, there were two electric

railroads installed by Edison at Menlo Park--one in 1880,

originally a third of a mile long, but subsequently increased

to about a mile in length, and the other in 1882, about three

miles long. As the 1880 road was built very soon after

Edison's notable improvements in dynamo machines, and as

the art of operating them to the best advantage was then being

developed, this early road was somewhat crude as compared

with the railroad of 1882; but both were practicable and

serviceable for the purpose of hauling passengers and freight.

The scope of the present article will be confined to a

description of the technical details of these two installations.



The illustration opposite page 454 of the preceding narrative

shows the first Edison locomotive and train of 1880 at

Menlo Park.



For the locomotive a four-wheel iron truck was used, and

upon it was mounted one of the long "Z" type 110-volt

Edison dynamos, with a capacity of 75 amperes, which was

to be used as a motor. This machine was laid on its side,

its armature being horizontal and located toward the front

of the locomotive.



We now quote from an article by Mr. E. W. Hammer,

published in the Electrical World, New York, June 10, 1899,

and afterward elaborated and reprinted in a volume entitled

Edisonia, compiled and published under the auspices of a

committee of the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies,

in 1904: "The gearing originally employed consisted

of a friction-pulley upon the armature shaft, another friction-

pulley upon the driven axle, and a third friction-pulley which

could be brought in contact with the other two by a suitable

lever. Each wheel of the locomotive was made with 

metallic rim and a centre portion made of wood or papier-

mache. A three-legged spider connected the metal rim of

each front wheel to a brass hub, upon which rested a collecting

brush. The other wheels were subsequently so equipped.

It was the intention, therefore, that the current should enter

the locomotive wheels at one side, and after passing through

the metal spiders, collecting brushes and motor, would pass

out through the corresponding brushes, spiders, and wheels

to the other rail."



As to the road: "The rails were light and were spiked to

ordinary sleepers, with a gauge of about three and one-half

feet. The sleepers were laid upon the natural grade, and

there was comparatively no effort made to ballast the road.

. . . No special precautions were taken to insulate the rails

from the earth or from each other."



The road started about fifty feet away from the generating

station, which in this case was the machine shop. Two

of the "Z" type dynamos were used for generating the current,

which was conveyed to the two rails of the road by

underground conductors.



On Thursday, May 13, 1880, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon,

this historic locomotive made its first trip, packed with as

many of the "boys" as could possibly find a place to hang

on. "Everything worked to a charm, until, in starting up

at one end of the road, the friction gearing was brought into

action too suddenly and it was wrecked. This accident

demonstrated that some other method of connecting the

armature with the driven axle should be arranged.



"As thus originally operated, the motor had its field circuit

in permanent connection as a shunt across the rails,

and this field circuit was protected by a safety-catch made

by turning up two bare ends of the wire in its circuit and

winding a piece of fine copper wire across from one bare

end to the other. The armature circuit had a switch in it

which permitted the locomotive to be reversed by reversing

the direction of current flow through the armature.



"After some consideration of the gearing question, it was

decided to employ belts instead of the friction-pulleys."

Accordingly, Edison installed on the locomotive a system of

belting, including an idler-pulley which was used by means

of a lever to tighten the main driving-belt, and thus power

was applied to the driven axle. This involved some slipping

and consequent burning of belts; also, if the belt were

prematurely tightened, the burning-out of the armature. This

latter event happened a number of times, "and proved to

be such a serious annoyance that resistance-boxes were

brought out from the laboratory and placed upon the locomotive

in series with the armature. This solved the difficulty.

The locomotive would be started with these resistance-boxes

in circuit, and after reaching full speed the operator could

plug the various boxes out of circuit, and in that way increase

the speed." To stop, the armature circuit was opened

by the main switch and the brake applied.



This arrangement was generally satisfactory, but the

resistance-boxes scattered about the platform and foot-rests

being in the way, Edison directed that some No. 8 B. & S.

copper wire be wound on the lower leg of the motor field-

magnet. "By doing this the resistance was put where it

would take up the least room, and where it would serve as

an additional field-coil when starting the motor, and it

replaced all the resistance-boxes which had heretofore been

in plain sight. The boxes under the seat were still retained

in service. The coil of coarse wire was in series with the

armature, just as the resistance-boxes had been, and could

be plugged in or out of circuit at the will of the locomotive

driver. The general arrangement thus secured was operated

as long as this road was in commission."



On this short stretch of road there were many sharp curves

and steep grades, and in consequence of the high speed attained

(as high as forty-two miles an hour) several derailments

took place, but fortunately without serious results.

Three cars were in service during the entire time of operating

this 1880 railroad: one a flat-car for freight; one an open

car with two benches placed back to back; and the third

a box-car, familiarly known as the "Pullman." This latter

car had an interesting adjunct in an electric braking system

(covered by Edison's Patent No. 248,430). "Each car axle had

a large iron disk mounted on and revolving with it between

the poles of a powerful horseshoe electromagnet. The pole-

pieces of the magnet were movable, and would be attracted

to the revolving disk when the magnet was energized, grasping

the same and acting to retard the revolution of the car axle."



Interesting articles on Edison's first electric railroad were

published in the technical and other papers, among which

may be mentioned the New York Herald, May 15 and July

23, 1880; the New York Graphic, July 27, 1880; and the

Scientific American, June 6, 1880.



Edison's second electric railroad of 1882 was more pretentious

as regards length, construction, and equipment. It

was about three miles long, of nearly standard gauge, and

substantially constructed. Curves were modified, and grades

eliminated where possible by the erection of numerous

trestles. This road also had some features of conventional

railroads, such as sidings, turn-tables, freight platform, and

car-house. "Current was supplied to the road by underground

feeder cables from the dynamo-room of the laboratory.

The rails were insulated from the ties by giving them

two coats of japan, baking them in the oven, and then placing

them on pads of tar-impregnated muslin laid on the ties.

The ends of the rails were not japanned, but were electroplated,

to give good contact surfaces for fish-plates and copper

bonds."



The following notes of Mr. Frederick A. Scheffler, who designed

the passenger locomotive for the 1882 road, throw

an interesting light on its technical details:





"In May, 1881, I was engaged by Mr. M. F. Moore, who

was the first General Manager of the Edison Company for

Isolated Lighting, as a draftsman to undertake the work of

designing and building Edison's electric locomotive No. 2.



"Previous to that time I had been employed in the engineering

department of Grant Locomotive Works, Paterson,

New Jersey, and the Rhode Island Locomotive Works,

Providence, Rhode Island....



"It was Mr. Edison's idea, as I understood it at that time,

to build a locomotive along the general lines of steam locomotives

(at least, in outward appearance), and to combine

in that respect the framework, truck, and other parts

known to be satisfactory in steam locomotives at the same

time.



"This naturally required the services of a draftsman accustomed

to steam-locomotive practice.... Mr. Moore was

a man of great railroad and locomotive experience, and his

knowledge in that direction was of great assistance in the

designing and building of this locomotive.



"At that time I had no knowledge of electricity.... One

could count so-called electrical engineers on his fingers then,

and have some fingers left over.



"Consequently, the ELECTRICAL equipment was designed by

Mr. Edison and his assistants. The data and parts, such as

motor, rheostat, switches, etc., were given to me, and my

work was to design the supporting frame, axles, countershafts,

driving mechanism, speed control, wheels and boxes,

cab, running board, pilot (or `cow-catcher'), buffers, and even

supports for the headlight. I believe I also designed a bell

and supports. From this it will be seen that the locomotive

had all the essential paraphernalia to make it LOOK like a

steam locomotive.



"The principal part of the outfit was the electric motor.

At that time motors were curiosities. There were no electric

motors even for stationary purposes, except freaks built for

experimental uses. This motor was made from the parts--

such as fields, armature, commutator, shaft and bearings,

etc., of an Edison "Z," or 60-light dynamo. It was the only

size of dynamo that the Edison Company had marketed at

that time.... As a motor, it was wound to run at maximum

speed to develop a torque equal to about fifteen horse-power

with 220 volts. At the generating station at Menlo Park

four Z dynamos of 110 volts were used, connected two in

series, in multiple arc, giving a line voltage of 220.



"The motor was located in the front part of the locomotive,

on its side, with the armature shaft across the frames, or

parallel with the driving axles.



"On account of the high speed of the armature shaft it

was not possible to connect with driving-axles direct, but

this was an advantage in one way, as by introducing an

intermediate counter-shaft (corresponding to the well-known

type of double-reduction motor used on trolley-cars since

1885), a fairly good arrangement was obtained to regulate

the speed of the locomotive, exclusive of resistance in the

electric circuit.



"Endless leather belting was used to transmit the power

from the motor to the counter-shaft, and from the latter to

the driving-wheels, which were the front pair. A vertical

idler-pulley was mounted in a frame over the belt from

motor to counter-shaft, terminating in a vertical screw and

hand-wheel for tightening the belt to increase speed, or the

reverse to lower speed. This hand-wheel was located in the

cab, where it was easily accessible....



"The rough outline sketched below shows the location

of motor in relation to counter-shaft, belting, driving-wheels,

idler, etc.:



"On account of both rails being used for circuits, . . . the

driving-wheels had to be split circumferentially and completely

insulated from the axles. This was accomplished by

means of heavy wood blocks well shellacked or otherwise

treated to make them water and weather proof, placed radially

on the inside of the wheels, and then substantially bolted

to the hubs and rims of the latter.



"The weight of the locomotive was distributed over the

driving-wheels in the usual locomotive practice by means

of springs and equalizers.



"The current was taken from the rims of the driving-wheels

by a three-pronged collector of brass, against which flexible

copper brushes were pressed--a simple manner of overcoming

any inequalities of the road-bed.



"The late Mr. Charles T. Hughes was in charge of the

track construction at Menlo Park.... His work was excellent

throughout, and the results were highly satisfactory so far

as they could possibly be with the arrangement originally

planned by Mr. Edison and his assistants.



"Mr. Charles L. Clarke, one of the earliest electrical

engineers employed by Mr. Edison, made a number of tests

on this 1882 railroad. I believe that the engine driving the

four Z generators at the power-house indicated as high as

seventy horse-power at the time the locomotive was actually

in service."





The electrical features of the 1882 locomotive were very

similar to those of the earlier one, already described. Shunt

and series field-windings were added to the motor, and the

series windings could be plugged in and out of circuit as

desired. The series winding was supplemented by resistance-

boxes, also capable of being plugged in or out of circuit.

These various electrical features are diagrammatically shown

in Fig. 2, which also illustrates the connection with the

generating plant.



We quote again from Mr. Hammer, who says: "The freight-

locomotive had single reduction gears, as is the modern practice,

but the power was applied through a friction-clutch

The passenger-locomotive was very speedy, and ninety

passengers have been carried at a time by it; the freight-

locomotive was not so fast, but could pull heavy trains at a

good speed. Many thousand people were carried on this

road during 1882." The general appearance of Edison's

electric locomotive of 1882 is shown in the illustration

opposite page 462 of the preceding narrative. In the picture

Mr. Edison may be seen in the cab, and Mr. Insull on the

front platform of the passenger-car.







XIV



TRAIN TELEGRAPHY



WHILE the one-time art of telegraphing to and from moving

trains was essentially a wireless system, and allied in

some of its principles to the art of modern wireless telegraphy

through space, the two systems cannot, strictly speaking

be regarded as identical, as the practice of the former was

based entirely on the phenomenon of induction.



Briefly described in outline, the train telegraph system

consisted of an induction circuit obtained by laying strips

of metal along the top or roof of a railway-car, and the

installation of a special telegraph line running parallel with

the track and strung on poles of only medium height. The

train, and also each signalling station, was equipped with

regulation telegraph apparatus, such as battery, key, relay,

and sounder, together with induction-coil and condenser. In

addition, there was a special transmitting device in the shape

of a musical reed, or "buzzer." In practice, this buzzer was

continuously operated at a speed of about five hundred vibrations

per second by an auxiliary battery. Its vibrations were

broken by means of a telegraph key into long and short

periods, representing Morse characters, which were transmitted

inductively from the train circuit to the pole line

or vice versa, and received by the operator at the other end

through a high-resistance telephone receiver inserted in the

secondary circuit of the induction-coil.



The accompanying diagrammatic sketch of a simple form of

the system, as installed on a car, will probably serve to make

this more clear.



An insulated wire runs from the metallic layers on the

roof of the car to switch S, which is shown open in the sketch.

When a message is to be received on the car from a station

more or less remote, the switch is thrown to the left to con-

nect with a wire running to the telephone receiver, T. The

other wire from this receiver is run down to one of the axles

and there permanently connected, thus making a ground.

The operator puts the receiver to his ear and listens for the

message, which the telephone renders audible in the Morse

characters.



If a message is to be transmitted from the car to a receiving

station, near or distant, the switch, S, is thrown to the

other side, thus connecting with a wire leading to one end

of the secondary of induction-coil C. The other end of the

secondary is connected with the grounding wire. The primary

of the induction-coil is connected as shown, one end going

to key K and the other to the buzzer circuit. The other

side of the key is connected to the transmitting battery, while

the opposite pole of this battery is connected in the buzzer

circuit. The buzzer, R, is maintained in rapid vibration by

its independent auxiliary battery, B<1S>.



When the key is pressed down the circuit is closed, and

current from the transmitting battery, B, passes through

primary of the coil, C, and induces a current of greatly increased

potential in the secondary. The current as it passes

into the primary, being broken up into short impulses by

the tremendously rapid vibrations of the buzzer, induces

similarly rapid waves of high potential in the secondary, and

these in turn pass to the roof and thence through the intervening

air by induction to the telegraph wire. By a continued

lifting and depression of the key in the regular manner,

these waves are broken up into long and short periods,

and are thus transmitted to the station, via the wire, in

Morse characters, dots and dashes.



The receiving stations along the line of the railway were

similarly equipped as to apparatus, and, generally speaking

the operations of sending and receiving messages were

substantially the same as above described.



The equipment of an operator on a car was quite simple

consisting merely of a small lap-board, on which were

mounted the key, coil, and buzzer, leaving room for telegraph

blanks. To this board were also attached flexible conductors

having spring clips, by means of which connections

could be made quickly with conveniently placed terminals

of the ground, roof, and battery wires. The telephone receiver

was held on the head with a spring, the flexible connecting

wire being attached to the lap board, thus leaving the operator

with both hands free.



The system, as shown in the sketch and elucidated by

the text, represents the operation of train telegraphy in a

simple form, but combining the main essentials of the art

as it was successfully and commercially practiced for a number

of years after Edison and Gilliland entered the field.

They elaborated the system in various ways, making it more

complete; but it has not been deemed necessary to enlarge

further upon the technical minutiae of the art for the purpose

of this work.







XV



KINETOGRAPH AND PROJECTING KINETOSCOPE





ALTHOUGH many of the arts in which Edison has been a

pioneer have been enriched by his numerous inventions

and patents, which were subsequent to those of a fundamental

nature, the (so-called) motion-picture art is an exception,

as the following, together with three other additional patents[30]

comprise all that he has taken out on this subject:

United States Patent No. 589,168, issued August 31, 1897,

reissued in two parts--namely, No. 12,037, under date of

September 30,1902, and No. 12,192, under date of January

12, 1904. Application filed August 24, 1891.





[30] Not 491,993, issued February 21, 1893; No. 493,426,

issued March 14, 1893; No. 772,647, issued October 18, 1904.





There is nothing surprising in this, however, as the

possibility of photographing and reproducing actual scenes of

animate life are so thoroughly exemplified and rendered

practicable by the apparatus and methods disclosed in the

patents above cited, that these basic inventions in themselves

practically constitute the art--its development proceeding

mainly along the line of manufacturing details. That

such a view of his work is correct, the highest criterion--

commercial expediency--bears witness; for in spite of the

fact that the courts have somewhat narrowed the broad

claims of Edison's patents by reason of the investigations of

earlier experimenters, practically all the immense amount

of commercial work that is done in the motion-picture field

to-day is accomplished through the use of apparatus and

methods licensed under the Edison patents.



The philosophy of this invention having already been

described in Chapter XXI, it will be unnecessary to repeat

it here. Suffice it to say by way of reminder that it is

founded upon the physiological phenomenon known as the

persistence of vision, through which a series of sequential

photographic pictures of animate motion projected upon a

screen in rapid succession will reproduce to the eye all the

appearance of the original movements.



Edison's work in this direction comprised the invention

not only of a special form of camera for making original

photographic exposures from a single point of view with

very great rapidity, and of a machine adapted to effect the

reproduction of such pictures in somewhat similar manner

but also of the conception and invention of a continuous

uniform, and evenly spaced tape-like film, so absolutely

essential for both the above objects.



The mechanism of such a camera, as now used, consists of

many parts assembled in such contiguous proximity to each

other that an illustration from an actual machine would not

help to clearness of explanation to the general reader. Hence

a diagram showing a sectional view of a simple form of such

a camera is presented below.



In this diagram, A represents an outer light-tight box

containing a lens, C, and the other necessary mechanism

for making the photographic exposures, H<1S> and H<2S> being

cases for holding reels of film before and after exposure,

F the long, tape-like film, G a sprocket whose teeth engage

in perforations on the edges of the film, such sprocket being

adapted to be revolved with an intermittent or step-by-step

movement by hand or by motor, and B a revolving shutter

having an opening and connected by gears with G, and

arranged to expose the film during the periods of rest. A

full view of this shutter is also represented, with its opening,

D, in the small illustration to the right.



In practice, the operation would be somewhat as follows,

generally speaking: The lens would first be focussed on the

animate scene to be photographed. On turning the main

shaft of the camera the sprocket, G, is moved intermittently,

and its teeth, catching in the holes in the sensitized film,

draws it downward, bringing a new portion of its length in

front of the lens, the film then remaining stationary for an

instant. In the mean time, through gearing connecting the

main shaft with the shutter, the latter is rotated, bringing

its opening, D, coincident with the lens, and therefore exposing

the film while it is stationary, after which the film again

moves forward. So long as the action is continued these

movements are repeated, resulting in a succession of enormously

rapid exposures upon the film during its progress from

reel H<1S> to its automatic rewinding on reel H<2S>. While the

film is passing through the various parts of the machine it

is guided and kept straight by various sets of rollers between

which it runs, as indicated in the diagram.



By an ingenious arrangement of the mechanism, the film

moves intermittently so that it may have a much longer

period of rest than of motion. As in practice the pictures

are taken at a rate of twenty or more per second, it will be

quite obvious that each period of rest is infinitesimally brief,

being generally one-thirtieth of a second or less. Still it is

sufficient to bring the film to a momentary condition of complete

rest, and to allow for a maximum time of exposure,

comparatively speaking, thus providing means for taking

clearly defined pictures. The negatives so obtained are

developed in the regular way, and the positive prints

subsequently made from them are used for reproduction.



The reproducing machine, or, as it is called in practice, the

Projecting Kinetoscope, is quite similar so far as its general

operations in handling the film are concerned. In appearance

it is somewhat different; indeed, it is in two parts, the

one containing the lighting arrangements and condensing

lens, and the other embracing the mechanism and objective

lens. The "taking" camera must have its parts enclosed

in a light-tight box, because of the undeveloped, sensitized

film, but the projecting kinetoscope, using only a fully developed

positive film, may, and, for purposes of convenient

operation, must be accessibly open. The illustration (Fig. 2)

will show the projecting apparatus as used in practice.



The philosophy of reproduction is very simple, and is illustrated

diagrammatically in Fig. 3, reference letters being the

same as in Fig. 1. As to the additional reference letters, I is

a condenser J the source of light, and K a reflector.



The positive film is moved intermittently but swiftly

throughout its length between the objective lens and a beam

of light coming through the condenser, being exposed by the

shutter during the periods of rest. This results in a pro-

jection of the photographs upon a screen in such rapid succession

as to present an apparently continuous photograph

of the successive positions of the moving objects, which,

therefore, appear to the human eye to be in motion.



The first claim of Reissue Patent No. 12,192 describes the

film. It reads as follows:





"An unbroken transparent or translucent tape-like photographic

film having thereon uniform, sharply defined, equidistant

photographs of successive positions of an object in

motion as observed from a single point of view at rapidly

recurring intervals of time, such photographs being arranged

in a continuous straight-line sequence, unlimited in number

save by the length of the film, and sufficient in number to

represent the movements of the object throughout an extended

period of time."







XVI



EDISON'S ORE-MILLING INVENTIONS



THE wide range of Edison's activities in this department

of the arts is well represented in the diversity of the numerous

patents that have been issued to him from time to

time. These patents are between fifty and sixty in number,

and include magnetic ore separators of ten distinct types; also

breaking, crushing, and grinding

rolls, conveyors, dust-proof bearings,

screens, driers, mixers, bricking

apparatus and machines, ovens,

and processes of various kinds.



A description of the many devices

in each of these divisions

would require more space than is

available; hence, we shall confine

ourselves to a few items of predominating

importance, already referred

to in the narrative. commencing

with the fundamental magnetic ore

separator, which was covered by

United States Patent No. 228,329,

issued June 1, 1880.



The illustration here presented is copied from the drawing forming part of this patent. A hopper

with adjustable feed is supported several feet above a bin having a central partition. Almost

midway between the hopper and the bin is placed an electromagnet whose polar extension is so

arranged as to be a little to one side of a stream of material falling from the hopper. Normally,

a stream of finely divided ore falling from the hopper would fall into that portion of the bin lying

to the left of the partition. If, however, the magnet is energized from a source of current, the

magnetic particles in the falling stream are attracted by and move toward the magnet, which

is so placed with relation to the falling material that the magnetic particles cannot be attracted

entirely to the magnet before gravity has carried them past. Hence, their trajectory

is altered, and they fall on the right-hand side of the

partition in the bin, while the non-magnetic portion of the

stream continues in a straight line and falls on the other

side, thus effecting a complete separation.



This simple but effective principle was the one employed

by Edison in his great concentrating plant already described.

In practice, the numerous hoppers, magnets, and bins were

many feet in length; and they were arranged in batteries of

varied magnetic strength, in order that the intermingled

mass of crushed rock and iron ore might be more thoroughly

separated by being passed through magnetic fields of

successively increasing degrees of attracting power. Altogether

there were about four hundred and eighty of these immense

magnets in the plant, distributed in various buildings in

batteries as above mentioned, the crushed rock containing

the iron ore being delivered to them by conveyors, and the

gangue and ore being taken away after separation by two

other conveyors and delivered elsewhere. The magnetic

separators at first used by Edison at this plant were of the

same generality as the ones employed some years previously

in the separation of sea-shore sand, but greatly enlarged

and improved. The varied experiences gained in the concentration

of vast quantities of ore led naturally to a greater

development, and several new types and arrangements of

magnetic separators were evolved and elaborated by him

from first to last, during the progress of the work at the

concentrating plant.



The magnetic separation of iron from its ore being the

foundation idea of the inventions now under discussion, a

consideration of the separator has naturally taken precedence

over those of collateral but inseparable interest. The ore-

bearing rock, however, must first be ground to powder before

it can be separated; hence, we will now begin at the

root of this operation and consider the "giant rolls," which

Edison devised for breaking huge masses of rock. In his

application for United States Patent No. 672,616, issued

April 23, 1901, applied for on July 16, 1897, he says: "The

object of my invention is to produce a method for the breaking

of rock which will be simple and effective, will not require

the hand-sledging or blasting of the rock down to pieces

of moderate size, and will involve the consumption of a small

amount of power."



While this quotation refers to the method as "simple,"

the patent under consideration covers one of the most bold

and daring projects that Edison has ever evolved. He

proposed to eliminate the slow and expensive method of

breaking large boulders manually, and to substitute therefor

momentum and kinetic energy applied through the medium

of massive machinery, which, in a few seconds, would break

into small pieces a rock as big as an ordinary upright cottage

piano, and weighing as much as six tons. Engineers to

whom Edison communicated his ideas were unanimous in

declaring the thing an impossibility; it was like driving two

express-trains into each other at full speed to crack a great

rock placed between them; that no practical machinery

could be built to stand the terrific impact and strains. Edison's

convictions were strong, however, and he persisted.

The experiments were of heroic size, physically and financially,

but after a struggle of several years and an expenditure

of about $100,000, he realized the correctness and practicability

of his plans in the success of the giant rolls, which

were the outcome of his labors.



The giant rolls consist of a pair of iron cylinders of massive

size and weight, with removable wearing plates having

irregular surfaces formed by projecting knobs. These rolls

are mounted side by side in a very heavy frame (leaving a

gap of about fourteen inches between them), and are so

belted up with the source of power that they run in opposite

directions. The giant rolls described by Edison in the above-

named patent as having been built and operated by him had

a combined weight of 167,000 pounds, including all moving

parts, which of themselves weighed about seventy tons, each

roll being six feet in diameter and five feet long. A top view

of the rolls is shown in the sketch, one roll and one of its

bearings being shown in section.



In Fig. 2 the rolls are illustrated diagrammatically. As

a sketch of this nature, even if given with a definite scale,

does not always carry an adequate idea of relative dimensions

to a non-technical reader, we present in Fig. 3 a perspective

illustration of the giant rolls as installed in the concentrating

plant.



In practice, a small amount of power is applied to run the

giant rolls gradually up to a surface speed of several thousand

feet a minute. When this high speed is attained, masses of

rock weighing several tons in one or more pieces are dumped

into a hopper which guides them into the gap between the

rapidly revolving rolls. The effect is to partially arrest the

swift motion of the rolls instantaneously, and thereby

develop and expend an enormous amount of kinetic energy,

which with pile-driver effect cracks the rocks and breaks

them into pieces small enough to pass through the fourteen-

inch gap. As the power is applied to the rolls through

slipping friction-clutches, the speed of the driving-pulleys

is not materially reduced; hence the rolls may again be

quickly speeded up to their highest velocity while another

load of rock is being hoisted in position to be dumped into

the hopper. It will be obvious from the foregoing that if

it were attempted to supply the great energy necessary for

this operation by direct application of steam-power, an

engine of enormous horse-power would be required, and even

then it is doubtful if one could be constructed of sufficient

strength to withstand the terrific strains that would ensue.

But the work is done by the great momentum and kinetic

energy obtained by speeding up these tremendous masses

of metal, and then suddenly opposing their progress, the

engine being relieved of all strain through the medium of

the slipping friction-clutches. Thus, this cyclopean operation

may be continuously conducted with an amount of

power prodigiously inferior, in proportion, to the results

accomplished.



The sketch (Fig. 4) showing a large boulder being dumped

into the hopper, or roll-pit, will serve to illustrate the method

of feeding these great masses of rock to the rolls, and will

also enable the reader to form an idea of the rapidity of the

breaking operation, when it is stated that a boulder of the

size represented would be reduced by the giant rolls to pieces

a trifle larger than a man's head in a few seconds.



After leaving the giant rolls the broken rock passed on

through other crushing-rolls of somewhat similar construc-

tion. These also were invented by Edison, but antedated

those previously described; being covered by Patent No.

567,187, issued September 8, 1896. These rolls were

intended for the reducing of "one-man-size" rocks to small

pieces, which at the time of their original inception was

about the standard size of similar machines. At the

Edison concentrating plant the broken rock, after passing

through these rolls, was further reduced in size by other rolls,

and was then ready to be crushed to a fine powder through

the medium of another remarkable machine devised by





NOTE.--Figs. 3 and 4 are reproduced from similar sketches on pages 84 and 85

of McClure's Magazine for November, 1897, by permission of S. S. McClure Co.





Edison to meet his ever-recurring and well-defined ideas of

the utmost economy and efficiency. The best fine grinding-

machines that it was then possible to obtain were so

inefficient as to involve a loss of 82 per cent. of the power

applied. The thought of such an enormous loss was unbearable,

and he did not rest until he had invented and put into

use an entirely new grinding-machine, which was called the

"three-high" rolls. The device was covered by a patent

issued to him on November 21, 1899, No. 637,327. It was

a most noteworthy invention, for it brought into the art

not only a greater efficiency of grinding than had ever been

dreamed of before, but also a tremendous economy by the

saving of power; for whereas the previous efficiency had

been 18 per cent. and the loss 82 per cent., Edison reversed

these figures, and in his three-high rolls produced a working

efficiency of 84 per cent., thus reducing the loss of power

by friction to 16 per cent. A diagrammatic sketch of this

remarkable machine is shown in Fig. 5, which shows a front

elevation with the casings, hopper, etc., removed, and also

shows above the rolls the rope and pulleys, the supports for

which are also removed for the sake of clearness in the

illustration.



For the convenience of the reader, in referring to Fig. 5,

we will repeat the description of the three-high rolls, which

is given on pages 487 and 488 of the preceding narrative.



In the two end-pieces of a heavy iron frame were set three

rolls, or cylinders--one in the centre, another below, and

the other above--all three being in a vertical line. These

rolls were about three feet in diameter, made of cast-iron,

and had face-plates of chilled-iron.[31] The lowest roll was set

in a fixed bearing at the bottom of the frame, and, therefore,

could only turn around on its axis. The middle and top

rolls were free to move up or down from and toward the

lower roll, and the shafts of the middle and upper rolls were

set in a loose bearing which could slip up and down in the

iron frame. It will be apparent, therefore, that any material

which passed in between the top and the middle rolls,

and the middle and bottom rolls, could be ground as fine as

might be desired, depending entirely upon the amount of

pressure applied to the loose rolls. In operation the material

passed first through the upper and middle rolls, and then

between the middle and lowest rolls.





[31] The faces of these rolls were smooth, but as three-high rolls

came into use later in Edison's Portland cement operations the faces

were corrugated so as to fit into each other, gear-fashion, to provide

for a high rate of feed.





This pressure was applied in a most ingenious manner.

On the ends of the shafts of the bottom and top rolls there

were cylindrical sleeves, or bearings, having seven sheaves

in which was run a half-inch endless wire rope. This rope

was wound seven times over the sheaves as above, and led

upward and over a single-groove sheave, which was operated

by the piston of an air-cylinder, and in this manner the

pressure was applied to the rolls. It will be seen, therefore

that the system consisted in a single rope passed over sheaves

and so arranged that it could be varied in length, thus providing

for elasticity in exerting pressure and regulating it

as desired. The efficiency of this system was incomparably

greater than that of any other known crusher or grinder, for

while a pressure of one hundred and twenty-five thousand

pounds could be exerted by these rolls, friction was almost

entirely eliminated, because the upper and lower roll bearings

turned with the rolls and revolved in the wire rope,

which constituted the bearing proper.



Several other important patents have been issued to Edison

for crushing and grinding rolls, some of them being for

elaborations and improvements of those above described

but all covering methods of greater economy and effectiveness

in rock-grinding.



Edison's work on conveyors during the period of his ore-

concentrating labors was distinctively original, ingenious

and far in advance of the times. His conception of the

concentrating problem was broad and embraced an entire

system, of which a principal item was the continuous transfer

of enormous quantities of material from place to place

at the lowest possible cost. As he contemplated the concentration

of six thousand tons daily, the expense of manual

labor to move such an immense quantity of rock, sand, and

ore would be absolutely prohibitive. Hence, it became

necessary to invent a system of conveyors that would be

capable of transferring this mass of material from one place

to another. And not only must these conveyors be capable

of carrying the material, but they must also be devised so

that they would automatically receive and discharge their

respective loads at appointed places. Edison's ingenuity,

engineering ability, and inventive skill were equal to the task,

however, and were displayed in a system and variety of conveyors

that in practice seemed to act with almost human

discrimination. When fully installed throughout the plant,

they automatically transferred daily a mass of material equal

to about one hundred thousand cubic feet, from mill to mill,

covering about a mile in the transit. Up and down, winding

in and out, turning corners, delivering material from one to

another, making a number of loops in the drying-oven, filling

up bins and passing on to the next when they were full,

these conveyors in automatic action seemingly played their

part with human intelligence, which was in reality the reflection

of the intelligence and ingenuity that had originally

devised them and set them in motion.



Six of Edison's patents on conveyors include a variety

of devices that have since came into broad general use for

similar work, and have been the means of effecting great

economies in numerous industries of widely varying kinds.

Interesting as they are, however, we shall not attempt to

describe them in detail, as the space required would be too

great. They are specified in the list of patents following this

Appendix, and may be examined in detail by any interested

student.



In the same list will also be found a large number of Edison's

patents on apparatus and methods of screening, drying,

mixing, and briquetting, as well as for dust-proof

bearings, and various types and groupings of separators,

all of which were called forth by the exigencies and magnitude

of his great undertaking, and without which he could

not possibly have attained the successful physical results

that crowned his labors. Edison's persistence in reducing

the cost of his operations is noteworthy in connection with

his screening and drying inventions, in which the utmost

advantage is taken of the law of gravitation. With its

assistance, which cost nothing, these operations were

performed perfectly. It was only necessary to deliver the

material at the top of the chambers, and during its natural

descent it was screened or dried as the case might be.



All these inventions and devices, as well as those described

in detail above (except magnetic separators and mixing

and briquetting machines), are being used by him to-day

in the manufacture of Portland cement, as that industry

presents many of the identical problems which presented

themselves in relation to the concentration of iron ore.







XVII



THE LONG CEMENT KILN



IN this remarkable invention, which has brought about a

striking innovation in a long-established business, we see

another characteristic instance of Edison's incisive reasoning

and boldness of conception carried into practical effect

in face of universal opinions to the contrary.



For the information of those unacquainted with the process

of manufacturing Portland cement, it may be stated

that the material consists preliminarily of an intimate mixture

of cement rock and limestone, ground to a very fine

powder. This powder is technically known in the trade as

"chalk," and is fed into rotary kilns and "burned"; that is

to say, it is subjected to a high degree of heat obtained by

the combustion of pulverized coal, which is injected into the

interior of the kiln. This combustion effects a chemical

decomposition of the chalk, and causes it to assume a plastic

consistency and to collect together in the form of small

spherical balls. which are known as "clinker." Kilns are

usually arranged with a slight incline, at the upper end of

which the chalk is fed in and gradually works its way down

to the interior flame of burning fuel at the other end. When

it arrives at the lower end, the material has been "burned,"

and the clinker drops out into a receiving chamber below.

The operation is continuous, a constant supply of chalk

passing in at one end of the kiln and a continuous dribble of

clinker-balls dropping out at the other. After cooling, the

clinker is ground into very fine powder, which is the Portland

cement of commerce.



It is self-evident that an ideal kiln would be one that

produced the maximum quantity of thoroughly clinkered

material with a minimum amount of fuel, labor, and investment.

When Edison was preparing to go into the cement

business, he looked the ground over thoroughly, and, after

considerable investigation and experiment, came to the conclusion

that prevailing conditions as to kilns were far from

ideal.



The standard kilns then in use were about sixty feet in

length, with an internal diameter of about five feet. In all

rotary kilns for burning cement, the true clinkering operation

takes place only within a limited portion of their total

length, where the heat is greatest; hence the interior of the

kiln may be considered as being divided longitudinally into

two parts or zones--namely, the combustion, or clinkering,

zone, and the zone of oncoming raw material. In the sixty-

foot kiln the length of the combustion zone was about ten

feet, extending from a point six or eight feet from the lower,

or discharge, end to a point about eighteen feet from that

end. Consequently, beyond that point there was a zone of

only about forty feet, through which the heated gases passed

and came in contact with the oncoming material, which was

in movement down toward the clinkering zone. Since the

bulk of oncoming material was small, the gases were not

called upon to part with much of their heat, and therefore

passed on up the stack at very high temperatures, ranging

from 1500 degrees to 1800 degrees Fahr. Obviously, this heat was entirely

lost.



An additional loss of efficiency arose from the fact that

the material moved so rapidly toward the combustion zone

that it had not given up all its carbon dioxide on reaching

there; and by the giving off of large quantities of that gas

within the combustion zone, perfect and economical combustion

of coal could not be effected.



The comparatively short length of the sixty-foot kiln not

only limited the amount of material that could be fed into

it, but the limitation in length of the combustion zone militated

against a thorough clinkering of the material, this

operation being one in which the elements of time and proper

heat are prime considerations. Thus the quantity of good

clinker obtainable was unfavorably affected. By reason of

these and other limitations and losses, it had been possible,

in practice, to obtain only about two hundred and fifty

barrels of clinker per day of twenty-four hours; and that

with an expenditure for coal proportionately equal to about

29 to 33 per cent. of the quantity of clinker produced, even

assuming that all the clinker was of good quality.



Edison realized that the secret of greater commercial

efficiency and improvement of quality lay in the ability to

handle larger quantities of material within a given time, and

to produce a more perfect product without increasing cost

or investment in proportion. His reasoning led him to the

conclusion that this result could only be obtained through

the use of a kiln of comparatively great length, and his

investigations and experiments enabled him to decide upon

a length of one hundred and fifty feet, but with an increase

in diameter of only six inches to a foot over that of the sixty-

foot kiln.



The principal considerations that influenced Edison in

making this radical innovation may be briefly stated as

follows:



First. The ability to maintain in the kiln a load from five

to seven times greater than ordinarily employed, thereby

tending to a more economical output.



Second. The combustion of a vastly increased bulk of

pulverized coal and a greatly enlarged combustion zone,

extending about forty feet longitudinally into the kiln--thus

providing an area within which the material might be maintained

in a clinkering temperature for a sufficiently long

period to insure its being thoroughly clinkered from periphery

to centre.



Third. By reason of such a greatly extended length of the

zone of oncoming material (and consequently much greater

bulk), the gases and other products of combustion would be

cooled sufficiently between the combustion zone and the stack

so as to leave the kiln at a comparatively low temperature.

Besides, the oncoming material would thus be gradually

raised in temperature instead of being heated abruptly, as

in the shorter kilns.



Fourth. The material having thus been greatly raised in

temperature before reaching the combustion zone would

have parted with substantially all its carbon dioxide, and

therefore would not introduce into the combustion zone

sufficient of that gas to disturb the perfect character of the

combustion.



Fifth. On account of the great weight of the heavy load

in a long kiln, there would result the formation of a continuous

plastic coating on that portion of the inner surface

of the kiln where temperatures are highest. This would

effectively protect the fire-brick lining from the destructive

effects of the heat.



Such, in brief, were the essential principles upon which

Edison based his conception and invention of the long kiln,

which has since become so well known in the cement business.



Many other considerations of a minor and mechanical

nature, but which were important factors in his solution of

this difficult problem, are worthy of study by those intimately

associated with or interested in the art. Not the least

of the mechanical questions was settled by Edison's decision

to make this tremendously long kiln in sections of cast-iron,

with flanges, bolted together, and supported on rollers

rotated by electric motors. Longitudinal expansion and

thrust were also important factors to be provided for, as

well as special devices to prevent the packing of the mass

of material as it passed in and out of the kiln. Special

provision was also made for injecting streams of pulverized coal

in such manner as to create the largely extended zone of

combustion. As to the details of these and many other in-

genious devices, we must refer the curious reader to the

patents, as it is merely intended in these pages to indicate

in a brief manner the main principles of Edison's notable

inventions. The principal United States patent on the long

kiln was issued October 24, 1905, No. 802,631.



That his reasonings and deductions were correct in this

case have been indubitably proven by some years of experience

with the long kiln in its ability to produce from

eight hundred to one thousand barrels of good clinker every

twenty-four hours, with an expenditure for coal proportionately

equal to about only 20 per cent. of the quantity of

clinker produced.



To illustrate the long cement kiln by diagram would convey

but little to the lay mind, and we therefore present an

illustration (Fig. 1) of actual kilns in perspective, from which

sense of their proportions may be gathered.







XVIII



EDISON'S NEW STORAGE BATTERY



GENERICALLY considered, a "battery" is a device which

generates electric current. There are two distinct species

of battery, one being known as "primary," and the other

as "storage," although the latter is sometimes referred to

as a "secondary battery" or "accumulator." Every type

of each of these two species is essentially alike in its general

make-up; that is to say, every cell of battery of any kind

contains at least two elements of different nature immersed

in a more or less liquid electrolyte of chemical character.

On closing the circuit of a primary battery an electric current

is generated by reason of the chemical action which is

set up between the electrolyte and the elements. This involves

a gradual consumption of one of the elements and a

corresponding exhaustion of the active properties of the

electrolyte. By reason of this, both the element and the

electrolyte that have been used up must be renewed from

time to time, in order to obtain a continued supply of electric

current.



The storage battery also generates electric current through

chemical action, but without involving the constant repriming

with active materials to replace those consumed and

exhausted as above mentioned. The term "storage," as

applied to this species of battery, is, however, a misnomer,

and has been the cause of much misunderstanding to nontechnical

persons. To the lay mind a "storage" battery

presents itself in the aspect of a device in which electric

energy is STORED, just as compressed air is stored or accumulated

in a tank. This view, however, is not in accordance

with facts. It is exactly like the primary battery in the

fundamental circumstance that its ability for generating

electric current depends upon chemical action. In strict

terminology it is a "reversible" battery, as will be quite obvious

if we glance briefly at its philosophy. When a storage

battery is "charged," by having an electric current passed

through it, the electric energy produces a chemical effect,

adding oxygen to the positive plate, and taking oxygen away

from the negative plate. Thus, the positive plate becomes

oxidized, and the negative plate reduced. After the charging

operation is concluded the battery is ready for use, and

upon its circuit being closed through a translating device,

such as a lamp or motor, a reversion ("discharge") takes

place, the positive plate giving up its oxygen, and the negative

plate being oxidized. These chemical actions result in

the generation of an electric current as in a primary battery.

As a matter of fact, the chemical actions and reactions

in a storage battery are much more complex, but the

above will serve to afford the lay reader a rather simple idea

of the general result arrived at through the chemical activity

referred to.



The storage battery, as a commercial article, was introduced

into the market in the year 1881. At that time, and

all through the succeeding years, until about 1905, there

was only one type that was recognized as commercially

practicable--namely, that known as the lead-sulphuric-acid

cell, consisting of lead plates immersed in an electrolyte of

dilute sulphuric acid. In the year last named Edison first

brought out his new form of nickel-iron cell with alkaline

electrolyte, as we have related in the preceding narrative.

Early in the eighties, at Menlo Park, he had given much

thought to the lead type of storage battery, and during the

course of three years had made a prodigious number of experiments

in the direction of improving it, probably performing

more experiments in that time than the aggregate

of those of all other investigators. Even in those early days

he arrived at the conclusion that the lead-sulphuric-acid

combination was intrinsically wrong, and did not embrace

the elements of a permanent commercial device. He did

not at that time, however, engage in a serious search for

another form of storage battery, being tremendously occupied

with his lighting system and other matters.



It may here be noted, for the information of the lay

reader, that the lead-acid type of storage battery consists

of two or more lead plates immersed in dilute sulphuric acid

and contained in a receptacle of glass, hard rubber, or other

special material not acted upon by acid. The plates are

prepared and "formed" in various ways, and the chemical

actions are similar to those above stated, the positive plate

being oxidized and the negative reduced during "charge,"

and reversed during "discharge." This type of cell, however,

has many serious disadvantages inherent to its very

nature. We will name a few of them briefly. Constant

dropping of fine particles of active material often causes

short-circuiting of the plates, and always necessitates occasional

washing out of cells; deterioration through "sulphation"

if discharge is continued too far or if recharging is not

commenced quickly enough; destruction of adjacent metal-

work by the corrosive fumes given out during charge and

discharge; the tendency of lead plates to "buckle" under

certain conditions; the limitation to the use of glass, hard

rubber, or similar containers on account of the action of the

acid; and the immense weight for electrical capacity. The

tremendously complex nature of the chemical reactions which

take place in the lead-acid storage battery also renders it an

easy prey to many troublesome diseases.



In the year 1900, when Edison undertook to invent a

storage battery, he declared it should be a new type into

which neither sulphuric nor any other acid should enter.

He said that the intimate and continued companionship of

an acid and a metal was unnatural, and incompatible with

the idea of durability and simplicity. He furthermore

stated that lead was an unmechanical metal for a battery,

being heavy and lacking stability and elasticity, and that

as most metals were unaffected by alkaline solutions, he

was going to experiment in that direction. The soundness

of his reasoning is amply justified by the perfection of results

obtained in the new type of storage battery bearing his

name, and now to be described.



The essential technical details of this battery are fully

described in an article written by one of Edison's laboratory

staff, Walter E. Holland, who for many years has been

closely identified with the inventor's work on this cell

The article was published in the Electrical World, New

York, April 28, 1910; and the following extracts there-

from will afford an intelligent comprehension of this invention:



"The `A' type Edison cell is the outcome of nine years of

costly experimentation and persistent toil on the part of its

inventor and his associates....




"The Edison invention involves the use of an entirely new

voltaic combination in an alkaline electrolyte, in place of the

lead-lead-peroxide combination and acid electrolyte, characteristic

of all other commercial storage batteries. Experience

has proven that this not only secures durability and

greater output per unit-weight of battery, but in addition

there is eliminated a long list of troubles and diseases inherent

in the lead-acid combination....



"The principle on which the action of this new battery is

based is the oxidation and reduction of metals in an electrolyte

which does not combine with, and will not dissolve,

either the metals or their oxides; and an electrolyte, furthermore,

which, although decomposed by the action of the

battery, is immediately re-formed in equal quantity; and

therefore in effect is a CONSTANT element, not changing in density

or in conductivity.



"A battery embodying this basic principle will have features

of great value where lightness and durability are desiderata.

For instance, the electrolyte, being a constant

factor, as explained, is not required in any fixed and large

amount, as is the case with sulphuric acid in the lead battery;

thus the cell may be designed with minimum distancing of

plates and with the greatest economy of space that is consistent

with safe insulation and good mechanical design.

Again, the active materials of the electrodes being insoluble

in, and absolutely unaffected by, the electrolyte, are not liable

to any sort of chemical deterioration by action of the

electrolyte--no matter how long continued....



"The electrolyte of the Edison battery is a 21 per cent.



solution of potassium hydrate having, in addition, a small

amount of lithium hydrate. The active metals of the electrodes

--which will oxidize and reduce in this electrolyte

without dissolution or chemical deterioration--are nickel

and iron. These active elements are not put in the plates

AS METALS; but one, nickel, in the form of a hydrate, and the

other, iron, as an oxide.



"The containing cases of both kinds of active material

(Fig. 1), and their supporting grids (Fig. 2), as well as the

bolts, washers, and nuts used in assembling (Fig. 3), and

even the retaining can and its cover (Fig. 4), are all made of

nickel-plated steel--a material in which lightness, durability

and mechanical strength are most happily combined, and a

material beyond suspicion as to corrosion in an alkaline

electrolyte....



"An essential part of Edison's discovery of active ma-

setials for an alkaline storage battery was the PREPARATION

of these materials. Metallic powder of iron and nickel, or

even oxides of these metals, prepared in the ordinary way,

are not chemically active in a sufficient degree to work in a

battery. It is only when specially prepared iron oxide of

exceeding fineness, and nickel hydrate conforming to certain

physical, as well as chemical, standards can be made that the

alkaline battery is practicable. Needless to say, the working

out of the conditions and processes of manufacture of the

materials has involved great ingenuity and endless experimentation."





The article then treats of Edison's investigations into

means for supporting and making electrical connection with

the active materials, showing some of the difficulties encountered

and the various discoveries made in developing the perfected

cell, after which the writer continues his description

of the "A" type cell, as follows:





"It will be seen at once that the construction of the two

kinds of plate is radically different. The negative or iron

plate (Fig. 5) has the familiar flat-pocket construction.

Each negative contains twenty-four pockets--a pocket being

1/2 inch wide by 3 inches long, and having a maximum thickness

of a little more than 1/8 inch. The positive or nickel

plate (Fig. 6) is seen to consist of two rows of round rods

or pencils, thirty in number, held in a vertical position by

a steel support-frame. The pencils have flat flanges at the

ends (formed by closing in the metal case), by which they

are supported and electrical connection is made. The frame

is slit at the inner horizontal edges, and then folded in such

a way as to make individual clamping-jaws for each end-

flange. The clamping-in is done at great pressure, and the

resultant plate has great rigidity and strength.



"The perforated tubes into which the nickel active material

is loaded are made of nickel-plated steel of high quality.

They are put together with a double-lapped spiral seam to

give expansion-resisting qualities, and as an additional

precaution small metal rings are slipped on the outside. Each

tube is 1/4 inch in diameter by 4 1/8 inches long, add has eight

of the reinforcing rings.



"It will be seen that the `A' positive plate has been given

the theoretically best design to prevent expansion and overcome

trouble from that cause. Actual tests, long continued

under very severe conditions, have shown that the construction

is right, and fulfils the most sanguine expectations."





Mr. Holland in his article then goes on to explain the

development of the nickel flakes as the conducting factor in

the positive element, but as this has already been described

in Chapter XXII, we shall pass on to a later point, where

he says:





"An idea of the conditions inside a loaded tube can best

be had by microscopic examination. Fig. 7 shows a magnified

section of a regularly loaded tube which has been

sawed lengthwise. The vertical bounding walls are edges

of the perforated metal containing tube; the dark horizontal

lines are layers of nickel flake, while the light-colored

thicker layers represent the nickel hydrate. It should be

noted that the layers of flake nickel extend practically

unbroken across the tube and make contact with the metal wall

at both sides. These metal layers conduct current to or from

the active nickel hydrate in all parts of the tube very

efficiently. There are about three hundred and fifty layers of

each kind of material in a 4 1/8 -inch tube, each layer of nickel

hydrate being about 0.01 inch thick; so it will be seen that

the current does not have to penetrate very far into the nickel

hydrate--one-half a layer's thickness being the maximum

distance. The perforations of the containing tube, through

which the electrolyte reaches the active material, are also

shown in Fig. 7."





In conclusion, the article enumerates the chief

characteristics of the Edison storage battery which fit it pre-

eminently for transportation service, as follows: 1. No

loss of active material, hence no sediment short-circuits.

2. No jar breakage. 3. Possibility of quick disconnection

or replacement of any cell without employment of skilled

labor. 4. Impossibility of "buckling" and harmlessness of

a dead short-circuit. 5. Simplicity of care required. 6.

Durability of materials and construction. 7. Impossibility

of "sulphation." 8. Entire absence of corrosive fumes.

9. Commercial advantages of light weight. 10. Duration

on account of its dependability. 11. Its high practical

efficiency.







XIX



EDISON'S POURED CEMENT HOUSE



THE inventions that have been thus far described fall into

two classes--first, those that were fundamental in the great

arts and industries which have been founded and established

upon them, and, second, those that have entered into

and enlarged other arts that were previously in existence.

On coming to consider the subject now under discussion,

however, we find ourselves, at this writing, on the threshold

of an entirely new and undeveloped art of such boundless

possibilities that its ultimate extent can only be a matter of

conjecture.



Edison's concrete house, however, involves two main

considerations, first of which was the conception or creation of

the IDEA--vast and comprehensive--of providing imperishable

and sanitary homes for the wage-earner by molding

an entire house in one piece in a single operation, so to speak,

and so simply that extensive groups of such dwellings could

be constructed rapidly and at very reasonable cost. With

this idea suggested, one might suppose that it would be a

simple matter to make molds and pour in a concrete mixture.

Not so, however. And here the second consideration

presents itself. An ordinary cement mixture is composed

of crushed stone, sand, cement, and water. If such a mixture

be poured into deep molds the heavy stone and sand

settle to the bottom. Should the mixture be poured into

a horizontal mold, like the floor of a house, the stone and

sand settle, forming an ununiform mass. It was at this

point that invention commenced, in order to produce a concrete

mixture which would overcome this crucial difficulty.

Edison, with characteristic thoroughness, took up a line of

investigation, and after a prolonged series of experiments

succeeded in inventing a mixture that upon hardening re-

mained uniform throughout its mass. In the beginning of

his experimentation he had made the conditions of test

very severe by the construction of forms similar to that

shown in the sketch below.



This consisted of a hollow wooden form of the dimensions

indicated. The mixture was to be poured into the hopper

until the entire form was filled, such mixture flowing down

and along the horizontal legs and up the vertical members.

It was to be left until the mixture was hard, and the requirement

of the test was that there should be absolute uniformity

of mixture and mass throughout. This was finally

accomplished, and further invention then proceeded along

engineering lines looking toward the devising of a system

of molds with which practicable dwellings might be cast.



Edison's boldness and breadth of conception are well illustrated

in his idea of a poured house, in which he displays his

accustomed tendency to reverse accepted methods. In fact,

it is this very reversal of usual procedure that renders it

difficult for the average mind to instantly grasp the full

significance of the principles involved and the results attained.



Up to this time we have been accustomed to see the erection

of a house begun at the foundation and built up slowly,

piece by piece, of solid materials: first the outer frame, then

the floors and inner walls, followed by the stairways, and

so on up to the putting on of the roof. Hence, it requires a

complete rearrangement of mental conceptions to appreciate

Edison's proposal to build a house FROM THE TOP DOWNWARD,

in a few hours, with a freely flowing material poured into

molds, and in a few days to take away the molds and find

a complete indestructible sanitary house, including foundation,

frame, floors, walls, stairways, chimneys, sanitary

arrangements, and roof, with artistic ornamentation inside and

out, all in one solid piece, as if it were graven or bored out

of a rock.



To bring about the accomplishment of a project so extraordinarily

broad involves engineering and mechanical conceptions

of a high order, and, as we have seen, these have

been brought to bear on the subject by Edison, together with

an intimate knowledge of compounded materials.



The main features of this invention are easily comprehensible

with the aid of the following diagrammatic sectional sketch:



It should be first understood that the above sketch is in

broad outline, without elaboration, merely to illustrate the

working principle; and while the upright structure on the

right is intended to represent a set of molds in position to

form a three-story house, with cellar, no regular details of

such a building (such as windows, doors, stairways, etc.) are

here shown, as they would only tend to complicate an

explanation.



It will be noted that there are really two sets of molds,

an inside and an outside set, leaving a space between them

throughout. Although not shown in the sketch, there is in

practice a number of bolts passing through these two sets

of molds at various places to hold them together in their

relative positions. In the open space between the molds

there are placed steel rods for the purpose of reinforcement;

while all through the entire structure provision is made for

water and steam pipes, gas-pipes and electric-light wires

being placed in appropriate positions as the molds are

assembled.



At the centre of the roof there will be noted a funnel-

shaped opening. Into this there is delivered by the endless

chain of buckets shown on the left a continuous stream of

a special free-flowing concrete mixture. This mixture descends

by gravity, and gradually fills the entire space between

the two sets of molds. The delivery of the material--or

"pouring," as it is called--is continued until every part of

the space is filled and the mixture is even with the tip of

the roof, thus completing the pouring, or casting, of the

house. In a few days afterward the concrete will have

hardened sufficiently to allow the molds to be taken away

leaving an entire house, from cellar floor to the peak of the

roof, complete in all its parts, even to mantels and picture

molding, and requiring only windows and doors, plumbing,

heating, and lighting fixtures to make it ready for habitation.



In the above sketch the concrete mixers, A, B, are driven

by the electric motor, C. As the material is mixed it descends

into the tank, D, and flows through a trough into a lower

tank, E, in which it is constantly stirred, and from which it

is taken by the endless chain of buckets and dumped into

the funnel-shaped opening at the top of the molds, as above

described.



The molds are made of cast-iron in sections of such size

and weight as will be most convenient for handling, mostly

in pieces not exceeding two by four feet in rectangular

dimensions. The subjoined sketch shows an exterior view of

several of these molds as they appear when bolted together,

the intersecting central portions representing ribs, which are

included as part of the casting for purposes of strength and

rigidity.



The molds represented above are those for straight work,

such as walls and floors. Those intended for stairways,

eaves, cornices, windows, doorways, etc., are much more

complicated in design, although the same general principles

are employed in their construction.



While the philosophy of pouring or casting a complete

house in its entirety is apparently quite simple, the development

of the engineering and mechanical questions involves

the solution of a vast number of most intricate and complicated

problems covering not only the building as a whole,

but its numerous parts, down to the minutest detail. Safety,

convenience, duration, and the practical impossibility of

altering a one-piece solid dwelling are questions that must

be met before its construction, and therefore Edison has

proceeded calmly on his way toward the goal he has ever had

clearly in mind, with utter indifference to the criticisms and

jeers of those who, as "experts," have professed positive

knowledge of the impossibility of his carrying out this daring

scheme.


