





CHAPTER V



ARDUOUS YEARS IN THE CENTRAL WEST



IN 1903, when accepting the position of honorary

electrician to the International Exposition held in

St. Louis in 1904, to commemorate the centenary of

the Louisiana Purchase, Mr. Edison spoke in his

letter of the Central West as a "region where as a

young telegraph operator I spent many arduous years

before moving East." The term of probation thus

referred to did not end until 1868, and while it lasted

Edison's wanderings carried him from Detroit to New

Orleans, and took him, among other cities, to Indianapolis,

Cincinnati, Louisville, and Memphis, some of

which he visited twice in his peregrinations to secure

work. From Canada, after the episodes noted in the

last chapter, he went to Adrian, Michigan, and of

what happened there Edison tells a story typical of

his wanderings for several years to come. "After

leaving my first job at Stratford Junction, I got a

position as operator on the Lake Shore & Michigan

Southern at Adrian, Michigan, in the division superintendent's

office. As usual, I took the `night trick,'

which most operators disliked, but which I preferred,

as it gave me more leisure to experiment. I had obtained

from the station agent a small room, and had

established a little shop of my own. One day the day

operator wanted to get off, and I was on duty. About

9 o'clock the superintendent handed me a despatch

which he said was very important, and which I must

get off at once. The wire at the time was very busy,

and I asked if I should break in. I got orders to do

so, and acting under those orders of the superintendent,

I broke in and tried to send the despatch; but

the other operator would not permit it, and the struggle

continued for ten minutes. Finally I got possession

of the wire and sent the message. The superintendent

of telegraph, who then lived in Adrian and

went to his office in Toledo every day, happened that

day to be in the Western Union office up-town--and

it was the superintendent I was really struggling

with! In about twenty minutes he arrived livid with

rage, and I was discharged on the spot. I informed

him that the general superintendent had told me to

break in and send the despatch, but the general

superintendent then and there repudiated the whole

thing. Their families were socially close, so I was

sacrificed. My faith in human nature got a slight

jar."



Edison then went to Toledo and secured a position

at Fort Wayne, on the Pittsburg, Fort Wayne &

Chicago Railroad, now leased to the Pennsylvania

system. This was a "day job," and he did not like

it. He drifted two months later to Indianapolis,

arriving there in the fall of 1864, when he was at first

assigned to duty at the Union Station at a salary

of $75 a month for the Western Union Telegraph

Company, whose service he now entered, and with

which he has been destined to maintain highly im-

portent and close relationships throughout a large

part of his life. Superintendent Wallick appears to

have treated him generously and to have loaned him

instruments, a kindness that was greatly appreciated,

for twenty years later the inventor called on his old

employer, and together they visited the scene where

the borrowed apparatus had been mounted on a

rough board in the depot. Edison did not stay long

in Indianapolis, however, resigning in February, 1865,

and proceeding to Cincinnati. The transfer was possibly

due to trouble caused by one of his early inventions

embodying what has been characterized by

an expert as "probably the most simple and ingenious

arrangement of connections for a repeater."

His ambition was to take "press report," but finding,

even after considerable practice, that he "broke"

frequently, he adjusted two embossing Morse registers

--one to receive the press matter, and the other to repeat

the dots and dashes at a lower speed, so that the

message could be copied leisurely. Hence he could

not be rushed or "broken" in receiving, while he

could turn out "copy" that was a marvel of neatness

and clearness. All was well so long as ordinary conditions

prevailed, but when an unusual pressure occurred

the little system fell behind, and the newspapers complained

of the slowness with which reports were delivered

to them. It is easy to understand that with

matter received at a rate of forty words per minute

and worked off at twenty-five words per minute a

serious congestion or delay would result, and the

newspapers were more anxious for the news than they

were for fine penmanship.



Of this device Mr. Edison remarks: "Together we

took press for several nights, my companion keeping

the apparatus in adjustment and I copying. The

regular press operator would go to the theatre or

take a nap, only finishing the report after 1 A.M. One

of the newspapers complained of bad copy toward

the end of the report--that, is from 1 to 3 A.M., and

requested that the operator taking the report up to

1 A.M.--which was ourselves--take it all, as the copy

then was perfectly unobjectionable. This led to an

investigation by the manager, and the scheme was

forbidden.



"This instrument, many years afterward, was applied

by me for transferring messages from one wire to

any other wire simultaneously, or after any interval

of time. It consisted of a disk of paper, the indentations

being formed in a volute spiral, exactly as in

the disk phonograph to-day. It was this instrument

which gave me the idea of the phonograph while working

on the telephone."



Arrived in Cincinnati, where he got employment in

the Western Union commercial telegraph department

at a wage of $60 per month, Edison made the

acquaintance of Milton F. Adams, already referred to

as facile princeps the typical telegrapher in all his

more sociable and brilliant aspects. Speaking of that

time, Mr. Adams says: "I can well recall when Edison

drifted in to take a job. He was a youth of about

eighteen years, decidedly unprepossessing in dress and

rather uncouth in manner. I was twenty-one, and

very dudish. He was quite thin in those days, and

his nose was very prominent, giving a Napoleonic

look to his face, although the curious resemblance did

not strike me at the time. The boys did not take to

him cheerfully, and he was lonesome. I sympathized

with him, and we became close companions. As an

operator he had no superiors and very few equals.

Most of the time he was monkeying with the batteries

and circuits, and devising things to make the work of

telegraphy less irksome. He also relieved the monotony

of office-work by fitting up the battery circuits

to play jokes on his fellow-operators, and to deal with

the vermin that infested the premises. He arranged

in the cellar what he called his `rat paralyzer,' a very

simple contrivance consisting of two plates insulated

from each other and connected with the main battery.

They were so placed that when a rat passed over

them the fore feet on the one plate and the hind feet

on the other completed the circuit and the rat departed

this life, electrocuted."



Shortly after Edison's arrival at Cincinnati came

the close of the Civil War and the assassination of

President Lincoln. It was natural that telegraphers

should take an intense interest in the general struggle,

for not only did they handle all the news relating to

it, but many of them were at one time or another personal

participants. For example, one of the operators

in the Cincinnati office was George Ellsworth,

who was telegrapher for Morgan, the famous Southern

Guerrilla, and was with him when he made his raid

into Ohio and was captured near the Pennsylvania

line. Ellsworth himself made a narrow escape by

swimming the Ohio River with the aid of an army

mule. Yet we can well appreciate the unimpression-

able way in which some of the men did their work,

from an anecdote that Mr. Edison tells of that awful

night of Friday, April 14, 1865: "I noticed," he says,

"an immense crowd gathering in the street outside

a newspaper office. I called the attention of the

other operators to the crowd, and we sent a messenger

boy to find the cause of the excitement. He returned

in a few minutes and shouted `Lincoln's shot.' Instinctively

the operators looked from one face to another

to see which man had received the news. All

the faces were blank, and every man said he had not

taken a word about the shooting. `Look over your

files,' said the boss to the man handling the press

stuff. For a few moments we waited in suspense,

and then the man held up a sheet of paper containing

a short account of the shooting of the President. The

operator had worked so mechanically that he had

handled the news without the slightest knowledge of

its significance." Mr. Adams says that at the time

the city was en fete on account of the close of the

war, the name of the assassin was received by telegraph,

and it was noted with a thrill of horror that it

was that of a brother of Edwin Booth and of Junius

Brutus Booth--the latter of whom was then playing

at the old National Theatre. Booth was hurried

away into seclusion, and the next morning the city

that had been so gay over night with bunting was

draped with mourning.



Edison's diversions in Cincinnati were chiefly those

already observed. He read a great deal, but spent

most of his leisure in experiment. Mr. Adams remarks:

"Edison and I were very fond of tragedy.

Forrest and John McCullough were playing at the

National Theatre, and when our capital was sufficient

we would go to see those eminent tragedians alternate

in Othello and Iago. Edison always enjoyed Othello

greatly. Aside from an occasional visit to the Loewen

Garden `over the Rhine,' with a glass of beer and

a few pretzels, consumed while listening to the excellent

music of a German band, the theatre was the

sum and substance of our innocent dissipation."



The Cincinnati office, as a central point, appears to

have been attractive to many of the clever young

operators who graduated from it to positions of larger

responsibility. Some of them were conspicuous for

their skill and versatility. Mr. Adams tells this interesting

story as an illustration: "L. C. Weir, or Charlie,

as he was known, at that time agent for the Adams

Express Company, had the remarkable ability of taking

messages and copying them twenty-five words

behind the sender. One day he came into the operating-

room, and passing a table he heard Louisville

calling Cincinnati. He reached over to the key and

answered the call. My attention was arrested by the

fact that he walked off after responding, and the

sender happened to be a good one. Weir coolly asked

for a pen, and when he sat down the sender was just

one message ahead of him with date, address, and

signature. Charlie started in, and in a beautiful,

large, round hand copied that message. The sender

went right along, and when he finished with six messages

closed his key. When Weir had done with the

last one the sender began to think that after all there

had been no receiver, as Weir did not `break,' but

simply gave his O. K. He afterward became president

of the Adams Express, and was certainly a wonderful

operator." The operating-room referred to

was on the fifth floor of the building with no elevators.



Those were the early days of trade unionism in

telegraphy, and the movement will probably never

quite die out in the craft which has always shown so

much solidarity. While Edison was in Cincinnati a

delegation of five union operators went over from

Cleveland to form a local branch, and the occasion

was one of great conviviality. Night came, but the

unionists were conspicuous by their absence, although

more circuits than one were intolerant of delay and

clamorous for attention---eight local unionists being

away. The Cleveland report wire was in special

need, and Edison, almost alone in the office, devoted

himself to it all through the night and until 3 o'clock

the next morning, when he was relieved.



He had previously been getting $80 a month, and

had eked this out by copying plays for the theatre.

His rating was that of a "plug" or inferior operator;

but he was determined to lift himself into the class of

first-class operators, and had kept up the practice of

going to the office at night to "copy press," acting

willingly as a substitute for any operator who wanted

to get off for a few hours--which often meant all

night. Speaking of this special ordeal, for which he

had thus been unconsciously preparing, Edison says:

"My copy looked fine if viewed as a whole, as I could

write a perfectly straight line across the wide sheet,

which was not ruled. There were no flourishes, but

the individual letters would not bear close inspection.

When I missed understanding a word, there was no

time to think what it was, so I made an illegible one

to fill in, trusting to the printers to sense it. I knew

they could read anything, although Mr. Bloss, an

editor of the Inquirer, made such bad copy that one

of his editorials was pasted up on the notice-board in

the telegraph office with an offer of one dollar to any

man who could `read twenty consecutive words.' Nobody

ever did it. When I got through I was too

nervous to go home, so waited the rest of the night

for the day manager, Mr. Stevens, to see what was to

be the outcome of this Union formation and of my

efforts. He was an austere man, and I was afraid

of him. I got the morning papers, which came out

at 4 A. M., and the press report read perfectly, which

surprised me greatly. I went to work on my regular

day wire to Portsmouth, Ohio, and there was

considerable excitement, but nothing was said to me,

neither did Mr. Stevens examine the copy on the

office hook, which I was watching with great interest.

However, about 3 P. M. he went to the hook, grabbed

the bunch and looked at it as a whole without examining

it in detail, for which I was thankful. Then he

jabbed it back on the hook, and I knew I was all

right. He walked over to me, and said: `Young

man, I want you to work the Louisville wire nights;

your salary will be $125.' Thus I got from the plug

classification to that of a `first-class man.' "



But no sooner was this promotion secured than he

started again on his wanderings southward, while his

friend Adams went North, neither having any difficulty

in making the trip. "The boys in those days

had extraordinary facilities for travel. As a usual

thing it was only necessary for them to board a train

and tell the conductor they were operators. Then

they would go as far as they liked. The number of

operators was small, and they were in demand

everywhere." It was in this way Edison made his way

south as far as Memphis, Tennessee, where the telegraph

service at that time was under military law,

although the operators received $125 a month. Here

again Edison began to invent and improve on existing

apparatus, with the result of having once more

to "move on." The story may be told in his own

terse language: "I was not the inventor of the auto

repeater, but while in Memphis I worked on one.

Learning that the chief operator, who was a protege

of the superintendent, was trying in some way to put

New York and New Orleans together for the first

time since the close of the war, I redoubled my efforts,

and at 2 o'clock one morning I had them speaking

to each other. The office of the Memphis Avalanche

was in the same building. The paper got wind of it

and sent messages. A column came out in the morning

about it; but when I went to the office in the

afternoon to report for duty I was discharged with

out explanation. The superintendent would not even

give me a pass to Nashville, so I had to pay my fare.

I had so little money left that I nearly starved at

Decatur, Alabama, and had to stay three days before

going on north to Nashville. Arrived in that city, I

went to the telegraph office, got money enough to

buy a little solid food, and secured a pass to Louisville.

I had a companion with me who was also out

of a job. I arrived at Louisville on a bitterly cold

day, with ice in the gutters. I was wearing a linen

duster and was not much to look at, but got a position

at once, working on a press wire. My travelling

companion was less successful on account of his

`record.' They had a limit even in those days when

the telegraph service was so demoralized."



Some reminiscences of Mr. Edison are of interest

as bearing not only upon the "demoralized" telegraph

service, but the conditions from which the

New South had to emerge while working out its

salvation. "The telegraph was still under military

control, not having been turned over to the original

owners, the Southern Telegraph Company. In addition

to the regular force, there was an extra force

of two or three operators, and some stranded ones,

who were a burden to us, for board was high. One of

these derelicts was a great source of worry to me,

personally. He would come in at all hours and either

throw ink around or make a lot of noise. One night

he built a fire in the grate and started to throw pistol

cartridges into the flames. These would explode, and

I was twice hit by the bullets, which left a black-and-

blue mark. Another night he came in and got from

some part of the building a lot of stationery with

`Confederate States' printed at the head. He was

a fine operator, and wrote a beautiful hand. He

would take a sheet of this paper, write capital `A,

and then take another sheet and make the `A' differently;

and so on through the alphabet; each time

crumpling the paper up in his hand and throwing

it on the floor. He would keep this up until the room

was filled nearly flush with the table. Then he would

quit.



"Everything at that time was `wide open.'

Disorganization reigned supreme. There was no head

to anything. At night myself and a companion would

go over to a gorgeously furnished faro-bank and get

our midnight lunch. Everything was free. There

were over twenty keno-rooms running. One of them

that I visited was in a Baptist church, the man with

the wheel being in the pulpit, and the gamblers in

the pews.



"While there the manager of the telegraph office

was arrested for something I never understood, and

incarcerated in a military prison about half a mile

from the office. The building was in plain sight from

the office, and four stories high. He was kept strictly

incommunicado. One day, thinking he might be confined

in a room facing the office, I put my arm out

of the window and kept signalling dots and dashes

by the movement of the arm. I tried this several

times for two days. Finally he noticed it, and putting

his arm through the bars of the window he established

communication with me. He thus sent several messages

to his friends, and was afterward set free."



Another curious story told by Edison concerns a

fellow-operator on night duty at Chattanooga Junction,

at the time he was at Memphis: "When it was

reported that Hood was marching on Nashville, one

night a Jew came into the office about 11 o'clock in

great excitement, having heard the Hood rumor. He,

being a large sutler, wanted to send a message to save

his goods. The operator said it was impossible--that

orders had been given to send no private messages.

Then the Jew wanted to bribe my friend, who steadfastly

refused for the reason, as he told the Jew, that

he might be court-martialled and shot. Finally the

Jew got up to $800. The operator swore him to

secrecy and sent the message. Now there was no

such order about private messages, and the Jew, finding

it out, complained to Captain Van Duzer, chief of

telegraphs, who investigated the matter, and while he

would not discharge the operator, laid him off

indefinitely. Van Duzer was so lenient that if an

operator were discharged, all the operator had to do

was to wait three days and then go and sit on the

stoop of Van Duzer's office all day, and he would be

taken back. But Van Duzer swore he would never

give in in this case. He said that if the operator had

taken $800 and sent the message at the regular rate,

which was twenty-five cents, it would have been all

right, as the Jew would be punished for trying to

bribe a military operator; but when the operator took

the $800 and then sent the message deadhead, he

couldn't stand it, and he would never relent."



A third typical story of this period deals with a

cipher message for Thomas. Mr. Edison narrates it

as follows: "When I was an operator in Cincinnati

working the Louisville wire nights for a time, one

night a man over on the Pittsburg wire yelled out:

`D. I. cipher,' which meant that there was a cipher

message from the War Department at Washington

and that it was coming--and he yelled out `Louisville.'

I started immediately to call up that place.

It was just at the change of shift in the office. I

could not get Louisville, and the cipher message began

to come. It was taken by the operator on the other

table direct from the War Department. It was for

General Thomas, at Nashville. I called for about

twenty minutes and notified them that I could not

get Louisville. I kept at it for about fifteen minutes

longer, and notified them that there was still no

answer from Louisville. They then notified the War

Department that they could not get Louisville. Then

we tried to get it by all kinds of roundabout ways,

but in no case could anybody get them at that office.

Soon a message came from the War Department to

send immediately for the manager of the Cincinnati

office. He was brought to the office and several

messages were exchanged, the contents of which, of course,

I did not know, but the matter appeared to be very

serious, as they were afraid of General Hood, of the

Confederate Army, who was then attempting to march

on Nashville; and it was very important that this

cipher of about twelve hundred words or so should

be got through immediately to General Thomas. I

kept on calling up to 12 or 1 o'clock, but no Louisville.

About 1 o'clock the operator at the Indianapolis

office got hold of an operator on a wire which ran

from Indianapolis to Louisville along the railroad,

who happened to come into his office. He arranged

with this operator to get a relay of horses, and the

message was sent through Indianapolis to this operator

who had engaged horses to carry the despatches to

Louisville and find out the trouble, and get the

despatches through without delay to General Thomas.

In those days the telegraph fraternity was rather

demoralized, and the discipline was very lax. It was

found out a couple of days afterward that there were

three night operators at Louisville. One of them had

gone over to Jeffersonville and had fallen off a horse

and broken his leg, and was in a hospital. By a

remarkable coincidence another of the men had been

stabbed in a keno-room, and was also in hospital

while the third operator had gone to Cynthiana to

see a man hanged and had got left by the train."



I think the most important line of

investigation is the production of

Electricity direct from carbon.

                      Edison







Young Edison remained in Louisville for about

two years, quite a long stay for one with such nomadic

instincts. It was there that he perfected the peculiar

vertical style of writing which, beginning with him in

telegraphy, later became so much of a fad with teachers

of penmanship and in the schools. He says of this form

of writing, a current example of which is given above:

"I developed this style in Louisville while taking press

reports. My wire was connected to the `blind' side

of a repeater at Cincinnati, so that if I missed a word

or sentence, or if the wire worked badly, I could not

break in and get the last words, because the Cincinnati

man had no instrument by which he could

hear me. I had to take what came. When I got the

job, the cable across the Ohio River at Covington,

connecting with the line to Louisville, had a variable

leak in it, which caused the strength of the signalling

current to make violent fluctuations. I obviated this

by using several relays, each with a different adjustment,

working several sounders all connected with

one sounding-plate. The clatter was bad, but I could

read it with fair ease. When, in addition to this infernal

leak, the wires north to Cleveland worked badly,

it required a large amount of imagination to get

the sense of what was being sent. An imagination

requires an appreciable time for its exercise, and as

the stuff was coming at the rate of thirty-five to forty

words a minute, it was very difficult to write down

what was coming and imagine what wasn't coming.

Hence it was necessary to become a very rapid writer,

so I started to find the fastest style. I found that the

vertical style, with each letter separate and without

any flourishes, was the most rapid, and that the

smaller the letter the greater the rapidity. As I took

on an average from eight to fifteen columns of news

report every day, it did not take long to perfect this

method." Mr. Edison has adhered to this characteristic

style of penmanship down to the present

time.



As a matter of fact, the conditions at Louisville

at that time were not much better than they had been

at Memphis. The telegraph operating-room was in

a deplorable condition. It was on the second story

of a dilapidated building on the principal street of

the city, with the battery-room in the rear; behind

which was the office of the agent of the Associated

Press. The plastering was about one-third gone from

the ceiling. A small stove, used occasionally in the

winter, was connected to the chimney by a tortuous

pipe. The office was never cleaned. The switchboard

for manipulating the wires was about thirty-

four inches square. The brass connections on it were

black with age and with the arcing effects of lightning,

which, to young Edison, seemed particularly partial

to Louisville. "It would strike on the wires," he

says, "with an explosion like a cannon-shot, making

that office no place for an operator with heart-disease."

Around the dingy walls were a dozen tables, the ends

next to the wall. They were about the size of those

seen in old-fashioned country hotels for holding

the wash-bowl and pitcher. The copper wires

connecting the instruments to the switchboard were

small, crystallized, and rotten. The battery-room

was filled with old record-books and message bundles,

and one hundred cells of nitric-acid battery, arranged

on a stand in the centre of the room. This stand, as

well as the floor, was almost eaten through by the

destructive action of the powerful acid. Grim and

uncompromising as the description reads, it was

typical of the equipment in those remote days of

the telegraph at the close of the war.



Illustrative of the length to which telegraphers

could go at a time when they were so much in de-

mand, Edison tells the following story: "When I took

the position there was a great shortage of operators.

One night at 2 A.M. another operator and I were on

duty. I was taking press report, and the other man

was working the New York wire. We heard a heavy

tramp, tramp, tramp on the rickety stairs. Suddenly

the door was thrown open with great violence,

dislodging it from one of the hinges. There appeared in

the doorway one of the best operators we had, who

worked daytime, and who was of a very quiet

disposition except when intoxicated. He was a great

friend of the manager of the office. His eyes were

bloodshot and wild, and one sleeve had been torn

away from his coat. Without noticing either of us

he went up to the stove and kicked it over. The

stove-pipe fell, dislocated at every joint. It was half

full of exceedingly fine soot, which floated out and

filled the room completely. This produced a

momentary respite to his labors. When the atmosphere

had cleared sufficiently to see, he went around

and pulled every table away from the wall, piling

them on top of the stove in the middle of the room.

Then he proceeded to pull the switchboard away from

the wall. It was held tightly by screws. He succeeded,

finally, and when it gave way he fell with

the board, and striking on a table cut himself so that

he soon became covered with blood. He then went

to the battery-room and knocked all the batteries off

on the floor. The nitric acid soon began to combine

with the plaster in the room below, which was the

public receiving-room for messengers and bookkeepers.

The excess acid poured through and ate up

the account-books. After having finished everything

to his satisfaction, he left. I told the other operator

to do nothing. We would leave things just as they

were, and wait until the manager came. In the

mean time, as I knew all the wires coming through to

the switchboard, I rigged up a temporary set of

instruments so that the New York business could be cleared

up, and we also got the remainder of the press matter.

At 7 o'clock the day men began to appear. They

were told to go down-stairs and wait the coming of

the manager. At 8 o'clock he appeared, walked

around, went into the battery-room, and then came

to me, saying: `Edison, who did this?' I told him

that Billy L. had come in full of soda-water and

invented the ruin before him. He walked backward

and forward, about a minute, then coming up to my

table put his fist down, and said: `If Billy L. ever

does that again, I will discharge him.' It was needless

to say that there were other operators who took

advantage of that kind of discipline, and I had many

calls at night after that, but none with such destructive

effects."



This was one aspect of life as it presented itself to

the sensitive and observant young operator in Louisville.

But there was another, more intellectual side,

in the contact afforded with journalism and its leaders,

and the information taken in almost unconsciously

as to the political and social movements of the time.

Mr. Edison looks back on this with great satisfaction.

"I remember," he says, "the discussions between the

celebrated poet and journalist George D. Prentice,

then editor of the Courier-Journal, and Mr. Tyler, of

the Associated Press. I believe Prentice was the

father of the humorous paragraph of the American

newspaper. He was poetic, highly educated, and a

brilliant talker. He was very thin and small. I do

not think he weighed over one hundred and twenty

five pounds. Tyler was a graduate of Harvard, and

had a very clear enunciation, and, in sharp contrast

to Prentice, he was a large man. After the paper had

gone to press, Prentice would generally come over to

Tyler's office and start talking. Having while in

Tyler's office heard them arguing on the immortality

of the soul, etc., I asked permission of Mr. Tyler if,

after finishing the press matter, I might come in and

listen to the conversation, which I did many times

after. One thing I never could comprehend was that

Tyler had a sideboard with liquors and generally

crackers. Prentice would pour out half a glass of

what they call corn whiskey, and would dip the

crackers in it and eat them. Tyler took it sans food.

One teaspoonful of that stuff would put me to sleep."



Mr. Edison throws also a curious side-light on the

origin of the comic column in the modern American

newspaper, the telegraph giving to a new joke or a

good story the ubiquity and instantaneity of an important

historical event. "It was the practice of the

press operators all over the country at that time, when

a lull occurred, to start in and send jokes or stories

the day men had collected; and these were copied

and pasted up on the bulletin-board. Cleveland was

the originating office for `press,' which it received

from New York, and sent it out simultaneously to

Milwaukee, Chicago, Toledo, Detroit, Pittsburg,

Columbus, Dayton, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Vincennes,

Terre Haute, St. Louis, and Louisville.

Cleveland would call first on Milwaukee, if he had

anything. If so, he would send it, and Cleveland

would repeat it to all of us. Thus any joke or story

originating anywhere in that area was known the

next day all over. The press men would come in

and copy anything which could be published, which

was about three per cent. I collected, too, quite a

large scrap-book of it, but unfortunately have lost it."



Edison tells an amusing story of his own pursuits

at this time. Always an omnivorous reader, he had

some difficulty in getting a sufficient quantity of

literature for home consumption, and was in the habit

of buying books at auctions and second-hand stores.

One day at an auction-room he secured a stack of

twenty unbound volumes of the North American

Review for two dollars. These he had bound and delivered

at the telegraph office. One morning, when

he was free as usual at 3 o'clock, he started off at a

rapid pace with ten volumes on his shoulder. He

found himself very soon the subject of a fusillade.

When he stopped, a breathless policeman grabbed him

by the throat and ordered him to drop his parcel and

explain matters, as a suspicious character. He opened

the package showing the books, somewhat to the

disgust of the officer, who imagined he had caught a

burglar sneaking away in the dark alley with his

booty. Edison explained that being deaf he had

heard no challenge, and therefore had kept moving;

and the policeman remarked apologetically that it

was fortunate for Edison he was not a better shot.



The incident is curiously revelatory of the character

of the man, for it must be admitted that while literary

telegraphers are by no means scarce, there are very

few who would spend scant savings on back numbers

of a ponderous review at an age when tragedy, beer,

and pretzels are far more enticing. Through all his

travels Edison has preserved those books, and has

them now in his library at Llewellyn Park, on Orange

Mountain, New Jersey.



Drifting after a time from Louisville, Edison made

his way as far north as Detroit, but, like the famous

Duke of York, soon made his way back again. Possibly

the severer discipline after the happy-go-lucky

regime in the Southern city had something to do with

this restlessness, which again manifested itself, however,

on his return thither. The end of the war had

left the South a scene of destruction and desolation,

and many men who had fought bravely and well

found it hard to reconcile themselves to the grim

task of reconstruction. To them it seemed better to

"let ill alone" and seek some other clime where

conditions would be less onerous. At this moment a

great deal of exaggerated talk was current as to the

sunny life and easy wealth of Latin America, and

under its influences many "unreconstructed" Southerners

made their way to Mexico, Brazil, Peru, or the

Argentine. Telegraph operators were naturally in

touch with this movement, and Edison's fertile imagination

was readily inflamed by the glowing idea of

all these vague possibilities. Again he threw up his

steady work and, with a couple of sanguine young

friends, made his way to New Orleans. They had the

notion of taking positions in the Brazilian Government

telegraphs, as an advertisement had been inserted

in some paper stating that operators were

wanted. They had timed their departure from Louisville

so as to catch a specially chartered steamer,

which was to leave New Orleans for Brazil on a

certain day, to convey a large number of Confederates

and their families, who were disgusted with the

United States and were going to settle in Brazil,

where slavery still prevailed. Edison and his friends

arrived in New Orleans just at the time of the great

riot, when several hundred negroes were killed, and

the city was in the hands of a mob. The Government

had seized the steamer chartered for Brazil, in order

to bring troops from the Yazoo River to New Orleans

to stop the rioting. The young operators therefore

visited another shipping-office to make inquiries as

to vessels for Brazil, and encountered an old Spaniard

who sat in a chair near the steamer agent's desk, and

to whom they explained their intentions. He had

lived and worked in South America, and was very

emphatic in his assertion, as he shook his yellow, bony

finger at them, that the worst mistake they could

possibly make would be to leave the United States.

He would not leave on any account, and they as

young Americans would always regret it if they forsook

their native land, whose freedom, climate, and

opportunities could not be equalled anywhere on the

face of the globe. Such sincere advice as this could

not be disdained, and Edison made his way North

again. One cannot resist speculation as to what might

have happened to Edison himself and to the develop-

ment of electricity had he made this proposed plunge

into the enervating tropics. It will be remembered

that at a somewhat similar crisis in life young Robert

Burns entertained seriously the idea of forsaking

Scotland for the West Indies. That he did not go

was certainly better for Scottish verse, to which he

contributed later so many immortal lines; and it was

probably better for himself, even if he died a gauger.

It is simply impossible to imagine Edison working

out the phonograph, telephone, and incandescent

lamp under the tropical climes he sought. Some years

later he was informed that both his companions had

gone to Vera Cruz, Mexico, and had died there of

yellow fever.



Work was soon resumed at Louisville, where the

dilapidated old office occupied at the close of the war

had been exchanged for one much more comfortable

and luxurious in its equipment. As before, Edison

was allotted to press report, and remembers very

distinctly taking the Presidential message and veto of

the District of Columbia bill by President Johnson.

As the matter was received over the wire he paragraphed

it so that each printer had exactly three

lines, thus enabling the matter to be set up very

expeditiously in the newspaper offices. This earned

him the gratitude of the editors, a dinner, and all the

newspaper "exchanges" he wanted. Edison's accounts

of the sprees and debauches of other night

operators in the loosely managed offices enable one to

understand how even a little steady application to

the work in hand would be appreciated. On one

occasion Edison acted as treasurer for his bibulous

companions, holding the stakes, so to speak, in order

that the supply of liquor might last longer. One of

the mildest mannered of the party took umbrage at

the parsimony of the treasurer and knocked him

down, whereupon the others in the party set upon

the assailant and mauled him so badly that he had

to spend three weeks in hospital. At another time

two of his companions sharing the temporary

hospitality of his room smashed most of the furniture,

and went to bed with their boots on. Then his kindly

good-nature rebelled. "I felt that this was running

hospitality into the ground, so I pulled them out and left

them on the floor to cool off from their alcoholic trance."



Edison seems on the whole to have been fairly

comfortable and happy in Louisville, surrounding himself

with books and experimental apparatus, and even

inditing a treatise on electricity. But his very thirst

for knowledge and new facts again proved his undoing.

The instruments in the handsome new offices

were fastened in their proper places, and operators

were strictly forbidden to remove them, or to use the

batteries except on regular work. This prohibition

meant little to Edison, who had access to no other

instruments except those of the company. "I went

one night," he says, "into the battery-room to obtain

some sulphuric acid for experimenting. The carboy

tipped over, the acid ran out, went through to the

manager's room below, and ate up his desk and all the

carpet. The next morning I was summoned before

him, and told that what the company wanted was

operators, not experimenters. I was at liberty to

take my pay and get out."



The fact that Edison is a very studious man, an

insatiate lover and reader of books, is well known to

his associates; but surprise is often expressed at his

fund of miscellaneous information. This, it will be

seen, is partly explained by his work for years as a

"press" reporter. He says of this: "The second

time I was in Louisville, they had moved into a new

office, and the discipline was now good. I took the

press job. In fact, I was a very poor sender, and

therefore made the taking of press report a specialty.

The newspaper men allowed me to come over after

going to press at 3 A.M. and get all the exchanges I

wanted. These I would take home and lay at the

foot of my bed. I never slept more than four or five

hours' so that I would awake at nine or ten and read

these papers until dinner-time. I thus kept posted,

and knew from their activity every member of Congress,

and what committees they were on; and all

about the topical doings, as well as the prices of

breadstuffs in all the primary markets. I was in a

much better position than most operators to call on

my imagination to supply missing words or sentences,

which were frequent in those days of old, rotten

wires, badly insulated, especially on stormy nights.

Upon such occasions I had to supply in some cases

one-fifth of the whole matter--pure guessing--but I

got caught only once. There had been some kind of

convention in Virginia, in which John Minor Botts

was the leading figure. There was great excitement

about it, and two votes had been taken in the

convention on the two days. There was no doubt that

the vote the next day would go a certain way. A

very bad storm came up about 10 o'clock, and my

wire worked very badly. Then there was a cessation

of all signals; then I made out the words `Minor

Botts.' The next was a New York item. I filled in

a paragraph about the convention and how the vote

had gone, as I was sure it would. But next day I

learned that instead of there being a vote the

convention had adjourned without action until the day

after." In like manner, it was at Louisville that Mr.

Edison got an insight into the manner in which great

political speeches are more frequently reported than

the public suspects. "The Associated Press had a

shorthand man travelling with President Johnson

when he made his celebrated swing around the circle

in a private train delivering hot speeches in defence

of his conduct. The man engaged me to write out

the notes from his reading. He came in loaded and

on the verge of incoherence. We started in, but about

every two minutes I would have to scratch out whole

paragraphs and insert the same things said in another

and better way. He would frequently change words,

always to the betterment of the speech. I couldn't

understand this, and when he got through, and I had

copied about three columns, I asked him why those

changes, if he read from notes. `Sonny,' he said,

`if these politicians had their speeches published as

they deliver them, a great many shorthand writers

would be out of a job. The best shorthanders and

the holders of good positions are those who can take

a lot of rambling, incoherent stuff and make a rattling

good speech out of it.' "



Going back to Cincinnati and beginning his second

term there as an operator, Edison found the office

in new quarters and with greatly improved management.

He was again put on night duty, much to his

satisfaction. He rented a room in the top floor of an

office building, bought a cot and an oil-stove, a foot

lathe, and some tools. He cultivated the acquaintance

of Mr. Sommers, superintendent of telegraph of

the Cincinnati & Indianapolis Railroad, who gave

him permission to take such scrap apparatus as he

might desire, that was of no use to the company.

With Sommers on one occasion he had an opportunity

to indulge his always strong sense of humor. "Sommers

was a very witty man," he says, "and fond of

experimenting. We worked on a self-adjusting telegraph

relay, which would have been very valuable if

we could have got it. I soon became the possessor

of a second-hand Ruhmkorff induction coil, which,

although it would only give a small spark, would

twist the arms and clutch the hands of a man so that

he could not let go of the apparatus. One day we

went down to the round-house of the Cincinnati &

Indianapolis Railroad and connected up the long wash-

tank in the room with the coil, one electrode being

connected to earth. Above this wash-room was a

flat roof. We bored a hole through the roof, and

could see the men as they came in. The first man

as he entered dipped his hands in the water. The

floor being wet he formed a circuit, and up went his

hands. He tried it the second time, with the same

result. He then stood against the wall with a

puzzled expression. We surmised that he was waiting

for somebody else to come in, which occurred

shortly after--with the same result. Then they went

out, and the place was soon crowded, and there was

considerable excitement. Various theories were

broached to explain the curious phenomenon. We

enjoyed the sport immensely." It must be remembered

that this was over forty years ago, when there

was no popular instruction in electricity, and when

its possibilities for practical joking were known to

very few. To-day such a crowd of working-men

would be sure to include at least one student of a

night school or correspondence course who would

explain the mystery offhand.



Note has been made of the presence of Ellsworth

in the Cincinnati office, and his service with the

Confederate guerrilla Morgan, for whom he tapped

Federal wires, read military messages, sent false ones,

and did serious mischief generally. It is well known

that one operator can recognize another by the way

in which he makes his signals--it is his style of

handwriting. Ellsworth possessed in a remarkable degree

the skill of imitating these peculiarities, and thus he

deceived the Union operators easily. Edison says

that while apparently a quiet man in bearing, Ellsworth,

after the excitement of fighting, found the

tameness of a telegraph office obnoxious, and that he

became a bad "gun man" in the Panhandle of Texas,

where he was killed. "We soon became acquainted,"

says Edison of this period in Cincinnati, "and he

wanted me to invent a secret method of sending

despatches so that an intermediate operator could not

tap the wire and understand it. He said that if it

could be accomplished, he could sell it to the Govern-

ment for a large sum of money. This suited me, and

I started in and succeeded in making such an

instrument, which had in it the germ of my quadruplex

now used throughout the world, permitting the despatch

of four messages over one wire simultaneously.

By the time I had succeeded in getting the apparatus

to work, Ellsworth suddenly disappeared. Many

years afterward I used this little device again for the

same purpose. At Menlo Park, New Jersey, I had

my laboratory. There were several Western Union

wires cut into the laboratory, and used by me in

experimenting at night. One day I sat near an instrument

which I had left connected during the night.

I soon found it was a private wire between New York

and Philadelphia, and I heard among a lot of stuff

a message that surprised me. A week after that I

had occasion to go to New York, and, visiting the

office of the lessee of the wire, I asked him if he hadn't

sent such and such a message. The expression that

came over his face was a sight. He asked me how I

knew of any message. I told him the circumstances,

and suggested that he had better cipher such

communications, or put on a secret sounder. The result

of the interview was that I installed for him my old

Cincinnati apparatus, which was used thereafter for

many years."



Edison did not make a very long stay in Cincinnati

this time, but went home after a while to Port Huron.

Soon tiring of idleness and isolation he sent "a cry

from Macedonia" to his old friend "Milt" Adams,

who was in Boston, and whom he wished to rejoin if

he could get work promptly in the East.



Edison himself gives the details of this eventful

move, when he went East to grow up with the new

art of electricity. "I had left Louisville the second

time, and went home to see my parents. After

stopping at home for some time, I got restless, and

thought I would like to work in the East. Knowing

that a former operator named Adams, who had worked

with me in the Cincinnati office, was in Boston, I wrote

him that I wanted a job there. He wrote back that

if I came on immediately he could get me in the

Western Union office. I had helped out the Grand

Trunk Railroad telegraph people by a new device

when they lost one of the two submarine cables they

had across the river, making the remaining cable

act just as well for their purpose, as if they had two.

I thought I was entitled to a pass, which they

conceded; and I started for Boston. After leaving

Toronto a terrific blizzard came up and the train got

snowed under in a cut. After staying there twenty-

four hours, the trainmen made snowshoes of fence-

rail splints and started out to find food, which they did

about a half mile away. They found a roadside inn,

and by means of snowshoes all the passengers were

taken to the inn. The train reached Montreal four

days late. A number of the passengers and myself

went to the military headquarters to testify in favor of

a soldier who was on furlough, and was two days late,

which was a serious matter with military people, I

learned. We willingly did this, for this soldier was

a great story-teller, and made the time pass quickly.

I met here a telegraph operator named Stanton,

who took me to his boarding-house, the most cheer-

less I have ever been in. Nobody got enough to eat;

the bedclothes were too short and too thin; it was

28 degrees below zero, and the wash-water was frozen

solid. The board was cheap, being only $1.50 per

week.



"Stanton said that the usual live-stock accompaniment

of operators' boarding-houses was absent;

he thought the intense cold had caused them

to hibernate. Stanton, when I was working in Cincinnati,

left his position and went out on the Union

Pacific to work at Julesburg, which was a cattle town

at that time and very tough. I remember seeing him

off on the train, never expecting to see him again.

Six months afterward, while working press wire in

Cincinnati, about 2 A.M., there was flung into the middle

of the operating-room a large tin box. It made

a report like a pistol, and we all jumped up startled.

In walked Stanton. `Gentlemen,' he said `I have

just returned from a pleasure trip to the land beyond

the Mississippi. All my wealth is contained in my

metallic travelling case and you are welcome to it.'

The case contained one paper collar. He sat down,

and I noticed that he had a woollen comforter around

his neck with his coat buttoned closely. The night

was intensely warm. He then opened his coat and

revealed the fact that he had nothing but the bare

skin. `Gentlemen,' said he, `you see before you an

operator who has reached the limit of impecuniosity.' "

Not far from the limit of impecuniosity was Edison

himself, as he landed in Boston in 1868 after this

wintry ordeal.



This chapter has run to undue length, but it must

not close without one citation from high authority

as to the service of the military telegraph corps so

often referred to in it. General Grant in his

Memoirs, describing the movements of the Army of

the Potomac, lays stress on the service of his

telegraph operators, and says: "Nothing could be more

complete than the organization and discipline of this

body of brave and intelligent men.  Insulated wires

were wound upon reels, two men and a mule detailed

to each reel. The pack-saddle was provided with a

rack like a sawbuck, placed crosswise, so that the

wheel would revolve freely; there was a wagon provided

with a telegraph operator, battery, and instruments

for each division corps and army, and for my

headquarters. Wagons were also loaded with light

poles supplied with an iron spike at each end to hold

the wires up. The moment troops were in position

to go into camp, the men would put up their wires.

Thus in a few minutes' longer time than it took a

mule to walk the length of its coil, telegraphic

communication would be effected between all the

headquarters of the army. No orders ever had to be given

to establish the telegraph."

