





CHAPTER X



THE PHONOGRAPH



AT the opening of the Electrical Show in New

York City in October, 1908, to celebrate the

jubilee of the Atlantic Cable and the first quarter

century of lighting with the Edison service on

Manhattan Island, the exercises were all conducted by

means of the Edison phonograph. This included the

dedicatory speech of Governor Hughes, of New York;

the modest remarks of Mr. Edison, as president; the

congratulations of the presidents of several national

electric bodies, and a number of vocal and instrumental

selections of operatic nature. All this was

heard clearly by a very large audience, and was

repeated on other evenings. The same speeches were

used again phonographically at the Electrical Show

in Chicago in 1909--and now the records are

preserved for reproduction a hundred or a thousand

years hence. This tour de force, never attempted

before, was merely an exemplification of the value of

the phonograph not only in establishing at first hand

the facts of history, but in preserving the human

voice. What would we not give to listen to the very

accents and tones of the Sermon on the Mount, the

orations of Demosthenes, the first Pitt's appeal for

American liberty, the Farewell of Washington, or the

Address at Gettysburg? Until Edison made his wonderful

invention in 1877, the human race was entirely

without means for preserving or passing on to posterity

its own linguistic utterances or any other vocal

sound. We have some idea how the ancients looked

and felt and wrote; the abundant evidence takes us

back to the cave-dwellers. But all the old languages

are dead, and the literary form is their embalmment.

We do not even know definitely how Shakespeare's

and Goldsmith's plays were pronounced on the stage

in the theatres of the time; while it is only a guess

that perhaps Chaucer would sound much more modern

than he scans.



The analysis of sound, which owes so much to

Helmholtz, was one step toward recording; and the

various means of illustrating the phenomena of sound

to the eye and ear, prior to the phonograph, were all

ingenious. One can watch the dancing little flames

of Koenig, and see a voice expressed in tongues of

fire; but the record can only be photographic. In

like manner, the simple phonautograph of Leon Scott,

invented about 1858, records on a revolving cylinder

of blackened paper the sound vibrations transmitted

through a membrane to which a tiny stylus is attached;

so that a human mouth uses a pen and inscribes

its sign vocal. Yet after all we are just as

far away as ever from enabling the young actors at

Harvard to give Aristophanes with all the true, subtle

intonation and inflection of the Athens of 400 B.C.

The instrument is dumb. Ingenuity has been shown

also in the invention of "talking-machines," like

Faber's, based on the reed organ pipe. These autom-

ata can be made by dexterous manipulation to jabber

a little, like a doll with its monotonous "ma-ma," or

a cuckoo clock; but they lack even the sterile utility

of the imitative art of ventriloquism. The real great

invention lies in creating devices that shall be able

to evoke from tinfoil, wax, or composition at any

time to-day or in the future the sound that once was

as evanescent as the vibrations it made on the air.



Contrary to the general notion, very few of the

great modern inventions have been the result of a

sudden inspiration by which, Minerva-like, they have

sprung full-fledged from their creators' brain; but,

on the contrary, they have been evolved by slow and

gradual steps, so that frequently the final advance

has been often almost imperceptible. The Edison

phonograph is an important exception to the general

rule; not, of course, the phonograph of the present

day with all of its mechanical perfection, but as an

instrument capable of recording and reproducing

sound. Its invention has been frequently attributed

to the discovery that a point attached to a telephone

diaphragm would, under the effect of sound-waves,

vibrate with sufficient force to prick the finger. The

story, though interesting, is not founded on fact;

but, if true, it is difficult to see how the discovery in

question could have contributed materially to the

ultimate accomplishment. To a man of Edison's perception

it is absurd to suppose that the effect of the

so-called discovery would not have been made as a

matter of deduction long before the physical sensation

was experienced. As a matter of fact, the invention

of the phonograph was the result of pure reason.

Some time prior to 1877, Edison had been experimenting

on an automatic telegraph in which the

letters were formed by embossing strips of paper

with the proper arrangement of dots and dashes.

By drawing this strip beneath a contact lever, the

latter was actuated so as to control the circuits and

send the desired signals over the line. It was observed

that when the strip was moved very rapidly

the vibration of the lever resulted in the production

of an audible note. With these facts before him,

Edison reasoned that if the paper strip could be imprinted

with elevations and depressions representative

of sound-waves, they might be caused to actuate a

diaphragm so as to reproduce the corresponding

sounds. The next step in the line of development

was to form the necessary undulations on the strip,

and it was then reasoned that original sounds themselves

might be utilized to form a graphic record by

actuating a diaphragm and causing a cutting or indenting

point carried thereby to vibrate in contact

with a moving surface, so as to cut or indent the

record therein. Strange as it may seem, therefore,

and contrary to the general belief, the phonograph

was developed backward, the production of the sounds

being of prior development to the idea of actually

recording them.



Mr. Edison's own account of the invention of the

phonograph is intensely interesting. "I was

experimenting," he says, "on an automatic method of

recording telegraph messages on a disk of paper laid

on a revolving platen, exactly the same as the disk

talking-machine of to-day. The platen had a spiral

groove on its surface, like the disk. Over this was

placed a circular disk of paper; an electromagnet

with the embossing point connected to an arm

travelled over the disk; and any signals given

through the magnets were embossed on the disk of

paper. If this disk was removed from the machine

and put on a similar machine provided with a contact

point, the embossed record would cause the

signals to be repeated into another wire. The ordinary

speed of telegraphic signals is thirty-five to

forty words a minute; but with this machine several

hundred words were possible.



"From my experiments on the telephone I knew

of the power of a diaphragm to take up sound vibrations,

as I had made a little toy which, when you

recited loudly in the funnel, would work a pawl connected

to the diaphragm; and this engaging a ratchet-

wheel served to give continuous rotation to a pulley.

This pulley was connected by a cord to a little paper

toy representing a man sawing wood. Hence, if one

shouted: `Mary had a little lamb,' etc., the paper

man would start sawing wood. I reached the conclusion

that if I could record the movements of the

diaphragm properly, I could cause such record to

reproduce the original movements imparted to the

diaphragm by the voice, and thus succeed in recording

and reproducing the human voice.



"Instead of using a disk I designed a little machine

using a cylinder provided with grooves around the

surface. Over this was to be placed tinfoil, which

easily received and recorded the movements of the

diaphragm. A sketch was made, and the piece-work

price, $18, was marked on the sketch. I was in the

habit of marking the price I would pay on each

sketch. If the workman lost, I would pay his regular

wages; if he made more than the wages, he kept it.

The workman who got the sketch was John Kruesi.

I didn't have much faith that it would work, expecting

that I might possibly hear a word or so that

would give hope of a future for the idea. Kruesi,

when he had nearly finished it, asked what it was for.

I told him I was going to record talking, and then

have the machine talk back. He thought it absurd.

However, it was finished, the foil was put on; I then

shouted `Mary had a little lamb,' etc. I adjusted the

reproducer, and the machine reproduced it perfectly.

I was never so taken aback in my life. Everybody

was astonished. I was always afraid of things that

worked the first time. Long experience proved that

there were great drawbacks found generally before

they could be got commercial; but here was something

there was no doubt of."



No wonder that honest John Kruesi, as he stood

and listened to the marvellous performance of the

simple little machine he had himself just finished,

ejaculated in an awe-stricken tone: "Mein Gott im

Himmel!" And yet he had already seen Edison do

a few clever things. No wonder they sat up all night

fixing and adjusting it so as to get better and better

results--reciting and singing, trying each other's

voices, and then listening with involuntary awe as

the words came back again and again, just as long

as they were willing to revolve the little cylinder

with its dotted spiral indentations in the tinfoil under

the vibrating stylus of the reproducing diaphragm.

It took a little time to acquire the knack of turning

the crank steadily while leaning over the recorder to

talk into the machine; and there was some deftness

required also in fastening down the tinfoil on the

cylinder where it was held by a pin running in a

longitudinal slot. Paraffined paper appears also to

have been experimented with as an impressible

material. It is said that Carman, the foreman of the

machine shop, had gone the length of wagering Edison

a box of cigars that the device would not work. All

the world knows that he lost.



The original Edison phonograph thus built by

Kruesi is preserved in the South Kensington Museum,

London. That repository can certainly have no

greater treasure of its kind. But as to its immediate

use, the inventor says: "That morning I took it over

to New York and walked into the office of the Scientific

American, went up to Mr. Beach's desk, and said I

had something to show him. He asked what it was.

I told him I had a machine that would record and

reproduce the human voice. I opened the package,

set up the machine and recited, `Mary had a little

lamb,' etc. Then I reproduced it so that it could

be heard all over the room. They kept me at it until

the crowd got so great Mr. Beach was afraid the

floor would collapse; and we were compelled to stop.

The papers next morning contained columns. None

of the writers seemed to understand how it was done.

I tried to explain, it was so very simple, but the results

were so surprising they made up their minds probably

that they never would understand it--and they didn't.



"I started immediately making several larger and

better machines, which I exhibited at Menlo Park to

crowds. The Pennsylvania Railroad ran special

trains. Washington people telegraphed me to come

on. I took a phonograph to Washington and exhibited

it in the room of James G. Blaine's niece

(Gail Hamilton); and members of Congress and

notable people of that city came all day long until

late in the evening. I made one break. I recited

`Mary,' etc., and another ditty:



 `There was a little girl, who had a little curl

     Right in the middle of her forehead;

 And when she was good she was very, very good,

     But when she was bad she was horrid.'



It will be remembered that Senator Roscoe Conkling,

then very prominent, had a curl of hair on his forehead;

and all the caricaturists developed it abnormally.

He was very sensitive about the subject.

When he came in he was introduced; but being rather

deaf, I didn't catch his name, but sat down and

started the curl ditty. Everybody tittered, and I

was told that Mr. Conkling was displeased. About

11 o'clock at night word was received from President

Hayes that he would be very much pleased if I would

come up to the White House. I was taken there,

and found Mr. Hayes and several others waiting.

Among them I remember Carl Schurz, who was playing

the piano when I entered the room. The exhibition

continued till about 12.30 A.M., when Mrs. Hayes

and several other ladies, who had been induced to

get up and dress, appeared. I left at 3.30 A,M,



"For a long time some people thought there was

trickery. One morning at Menlo Park a gentleman

came to the laboratory and asked to see the phonograph.

It was Bishop Vincent, who helped Lewis

Miller found the Chautauqua I exhibited it, and

then he asked if he could speak a few words. I put

on a fresh foil and told him to go ahead. He

commenced to recite Biblical names with immense

rapidity. On reproducing it he said: `I am satisfied,

now. There isn't a man in the United States who

could recite those names with the same rapidity.' "



The phonograph was now fairly launched as a

world sensation, and a reference to the newspapers

of 1878 will show the extent to which it and Edison

were themes of universal discussion. Some of the

press notices of the period were most amazing--and

amusing. As though the real achievements of

this young man, barely thirty, were not tangible

and solid enough to justify admiration of his genius,

the "yellow journalists" of the period began busily

to create an "Edison myth," with gross absurdities of

assertion and attribution from which the modest

subject of it all has not yet ceased to suffer with

unthinking people. A brilliantly vicious example of

this method of treatment is to be found in the Paris

Figaro of that year, which under the appropriate

title of "This Astounding Eddison" lay bare before

the French public the most startling revelations as

to the inventor's life and character. "It should be

understood," said this journal, "that Mr. Eddison

does not belong to himself. He is the property of

the telegraph company which lodges him in New

York at a superb hotel; keeps him on a luxurious

footing, and pays him a formidable salary so as to

be the one to know of and profit by his discoveries.

The company has, in the dwelling of Eddison,

men in its employ who do not quit him for a

moment, at the table, on the street, in the laboratory.

So that this wretched man, watched more

closely than ever was any malefactor, cannot even

give a moment's thought to his own private affairs

without one of his guards asking him what he is

thinking about." This foolish "blague" was accompanied

by a description of Edison's new "aerophone,"

a steam machine which carried the voice a distance

of one and a half miles. "You speak to a jet of

vapor. A friend previously advised can answer you

by the same method." Nor were American journals

backward in this wild exaggeration.



The furor had its effect in stimulating a desire

everywhere on the part of everybody to see and hear

the phonograph. A small commercial organization

was formed to build and exploit the apparatus, and

the shops at Menlo Park laboratory were assisted by

the little Bergmann shop in New York. Offices were

taken for the new enterprise at 203 Broadway, where

the Mail and Express building now stands, and

where, in a general way, under the auspices of a

talented dwarf, C. A. Cheever, the embryonic phonograph

and the crude telephone shared rooms and expenses.

Gardiner G. Hubbard, father-in-law of Alex.

Graham Bell, was one of the stockholders in the

Phonograph Company, which paid Edison $10,000

cash and a 20 per cent. royalty. This curious part-

nership was maintained for some time, even when

the Bell Telephone offices were removed to Reade

Street, New York, whither the phonograph went also;

and was perhaps explained by the fact that just then

the ability of the phonograph as a money-maker

was much more easily demonstrated than was that

of the telephone, still in its short range magneto

stage and awaiting development with the aid of the

carbon transmitter.



The earning capacity of the phonograph then, as

largely now, lay in its exhibition qualities. The

royalties from Boston, ever intellectually awake and

ready for something new, ran as high as $1800 a

week. In New York there was a ceaseless demand

for it, and with the aid of Hilbourne L. Roosevelt, a

famous organ builder, and uncle of ex-President

Roosevelt, concerts were given at which the phonograph

was "featured." To manage this novel show

business the services of James Redpath were called

into requisition with great success. Redpath, famous

as a friend and biographer of John Brown, as a

Civil War correspondent, and as founder of the

celebrated Redpath Lyceum Bureau in Boston, divided

the country into territories, each section being leased

for exhibition purposes on a basis of a percentage of

the "gate money." To 203 Broadway from all over

the Union flocked a swarm of showmen, cranks, and

particularly of old operators, who, the seedier they

were in appearance, the more insistent they were that

"Tom" should give them, for the sake of "Auld lang

syne," this chance to make a fortune for him and for

themselves. At the top of the building was a floor

on which these novices were graduated in the use and

care of the machine, and then, with an equipment of

tinfoil and other supplies, they were sent out on the

road. It was a diverting experience while it lasted.

The excitement over the phonograph was maintained

for many months, until a large proportion of the

inhabitants of the country had seen it; and then the

show receipts declined and dwindled away. Many of

the old operators, taken on out of good-nature, were

poor exhibitors and worse accountants, and at last

they and the machines with which they had been

intrusted faded from sight. But in the mean time

Edison had learned many lessons as to this practical

side of development that were not forgotten when

the renascence of the phonograph began a few years

later, leading up to the present enormous and steady

demand for both machines and records.



It deserves to be pointed out that the phonograph

has changed little in the intervening years from the

first crude instruments of 1877-78. It has simply

been refined and made more perfect in a mechanical

sense. Edison was immensely impressed with its

possibilities, and greatly inclined to work upon it,

but the coming of the electric light compelled him to

throw all his energies for a time into the vast new

field awaiting conquest. The original phonograph,

as briefly noted above, was rotated by hand, and the

cylinder was fed slowly longitudinally by means of

a nut engaging a screw thread on the cylinder shaft.

Wrapped around the cylinder was a sheet of tinfoil,

with which engaged a small chisel-like recording

needle, connected adhesively with the centre of an

iron diaphragm. Obviously, as the cylinder was

turned, the needle followed a spiral path whose pitch

depended upon that of the feed screw. Along this

path a thread was cut in the cylinder so as to permit

the needle to indent the foil readily as the diaphragm

vibrated. By rotating the cylinder and by causing

the diaphragm to vibrate under the effect of vocal

or musical sounds, the needle-like point would form

a series of indentations in the foil corresponding to

and characteristic of the sound-waves. By now

engaging the point with the beginning of the grooved

record so formed, and by again rotating the cylinder,

the undulations of the record would cause the needle

and its attached diaphragm to vibrate so as to effect

the reproduction. Such an apparatus was necessarily

undeveloped, and was interesting only from a scientific

point of view. It had many mechanical defects

which prevented its use as a practical apparatus.

Since the cylinder was rotated by hand, the speed

at which the record was formed would vary

considerably, even with the same manipulator, so that

it would have been impossible to record and reproduce

music satisfactorily; in doing which exact uniformity

of speed is essential. The formation of the

record in tinfoil was also objectionable from a practical

standpoint, since such a record was faint and

would be substantially obliterated after two or three

reproductions. Furthermore, the foil could not be

easily removed from and replaced upon the instrument,

and consequently the reproduction had to follow

the recording immediately, and the successive

tinfoils were thrown away. The instrument was also

heavy and bulky. Notwithstanding these objections

the original phonograph created, as already remarked,

an enormous popular excitement, and the exhibitions

were considered by many sceptical persons as nothing

more than clever ventriloquism. The possibilities

of the instrument as a commercial apparatus

were recognized from the very first, and some of the

fields in which it was predicted that the phonograph

would be used are now fully occupied. Some have

not yet been realized. Writing in 1878 in the North

American-Review, Mr. Edison thus summed up his

own ideas as to the future applications of the new

invention:





"Among the many uses to which the phonograph will

be applied are the following:



1. Letter writing and all kinds of dictation without the

aid of a stenographer.



2. Phonographic books, which will speak to blind people

without effort on their part.



3. The teaching of elocution.



4. Reproduction of music.



5. The `Family Record'--a registry of sayings,

reminiscences, etc., by members of a family in their own

voices, and of the last words of dying persons.



6. Music-boxes and toys.



7. Clocks that should announce in articulate speech

the time for going home, going to meals, etc.



8. The preservation of languages by exact reproduction

of the manner of pronouncing.



9. Educational purposes; such as preserving the

explanations made by a teacher, so that the pupil can refer

to them at any moment, and spelling or other lessons

placed upon the phonograph for convenience in committing

to memory.



10. Connection with the telephone, so as to make that

instrument an auxiliary in the transmission of permanent

and invaluable records, instead of being the recipient of

momentary and fleeting communication."





Of the above fields of usefulness in which it was

expected that the phonograph might be applied, only

three have been commercially realized--namely, the

reproduction of musical, including vaudeville or talking

selections, for which purpose a very large proportion

of the phonographs now made is used; the employment

of the machine as a mechanical stenographer,

which field has been taken up actively only

within the past few years; and the utilization of the

device for the teaching of languages, for which purpose

it has been successfully employed, for example,

by the International Correspondence Schools of

Scranton, Pennsylvania, for several years. The other

uses, however, which were early predicted for the

phonograph have not as yet been worked out practically,

although the time seems not far distant when

its general utility will be widely enlarged. Both dolls

and clocks have been made, but thus far the world

has not taken them seriously.



The original phonograph, as invented by Edison,

remained in its crude and immature state for almost

ten years--still the object of philosophical interest,

and as a convenient text-book illustration of the

effect of sound vibration. It continued to be a theme

of curious interest to the imaginative, and the subject

of much fiction, while its neglected commercial

possibilities were still more or less vaguely referred to.

During this period of arrested development, Edison

was continuously working on the invention and commercial

exploitation of the incandescent lamp. In

1887 his time was comparatively free, and the phonograph

was then taken up with renewed energy, and

the effort made to overcome its mechanical defects

and to furnish a commercial instrument, so that its

early promise might be realized. The important

changes made from that time up to 1890 converted

the phonograph from a scientific toy into a successful

industrial apparatus. The idea of forming the record

on tinfoil had been early abandoned, and in its stead

was substituted a cylinder of wax-like material, in

which the record was cut by a minute chisel-like gouging

tool. Such a record or phonogram, as it was then

called, could be removed from the machine or replaced

at any time, many reproductions could be

obtained without wearing out the record, and whenever

desired the record could be shaved off by a

turning-tool so as to present a fresh surface on which

a new record could be formed, something like an

ancient palimpsest. A wax cylinder having walls

less than one-quarter of an inch in thickness could

be used for receiving a large number of records, since

the maximum depth of the record groove is hardly

ever greater than one one-thousandth of an inch.

Later on, and as the crowning achievement in the

phonograph field, from a commercial point of view,

came the duplication of records to the extent of many

thousands from a single "master." This work was

actively developed between the years 1890 and 1898,

and its difficulties may be appreciated when the

problem is stated; the copying from a single master

of many millions of excessively minute sound-waves

having a maximum width of one hundredth of an

inch, and a maximum depth of one thousandth of

an inch, or less than the thickness of a sheet of

tissue-paper. Among the interesting developments of

this process was the coating of the original or master

record with a homogeneous film of gold so thin that

three hundred thousand of these piled one on top of

the other would present a thickness of only one inch!



Another important change was in the nature of a

reversal of the original arrangement, the cylinder or

mandrel carrying the record being mounted in fixed

bearings, and the recording or reproducing device

being fed lengthwise, like the cutting-tool of a lathe,

as the blank or record was rotated. It was early

recognized that a single needle for forming the record

and the reproduction therefrom was an undesirable

arrangement, since the formation of the record required

a very sharp cutting-tool, while satisfactory

and repeated reproduction suggested the use of a

stylus which would result in the minimum wear.

After many experiments and the production of a

number of types of machines, the present recorders

and reproducers were evolved, the former consisting

of a very small cylindrical gouging tool having a diameter

of about forty thousandths of an inch, and the

latter a ball or button-shaped stylus with a diameter

of about thirty-five thousandths of an inch. By

using an incisor of this sort, the record is formed of

a series of connected gouges with rounded sides,

varying in depth and width, and with which the

reproducer automatically engages and maintains its

engagement. Another difficulty encountered in the

commercial development of the phonograph was the

adjustment of the recording stylus so as to enter the

wax-like surface to a very slight depth, and of the

reproducer so as to engage exactly the record when

formed. The earlier types of machines were provided

with separate screws for effecting these adjustments;

but considerable skill was required to

obtain good results, and great difficulty was

experienced in meeting the variations in the wax-like

cylinders, due to the warping under atmospheric

changes. Consequently, with the early types of commercial

phonographs, it was first necessary to shave

off the blank accurately before a record was formed

thereon, in order that an absolutely true surface

might be presented. To overcome these troubles,

the very ingenious suggestion was then made and

adopted, of connecting the recording and reproducing

styluses to their respective diaphragms through the

instrumentality of a compensating weight, which acted

practically as a fixed support under the very rapid

sound vibrations, but which yielded readily to distortions

or variations in the wax-like cylinders. By

reason of this improvement, it became possible to do

away with all adjustments, the mass of the compensating

weight causing the recorder to engage the

blank automatically to the required depth, and to

maintain the reproducing stylus always with the desired

pressure on the record when formed. These

automatic adjustments were maintained even though

the blank or record might be so much out of true

as an eighth of an inch, equal to more than two

hundred times the maximum depth of the record

groove.



Another improvement that followed along the lines

adopted by Edison for the commercial development

of the phonograph was making the recording and reproducing

styluses of sapphire, an extremely hard,

non-oxidizable jewel, so that those tiny instruments

would always retain their true form and effectively

resist wear. Of course, in this work many other things

were done that may still be found on the perfected

phonograph as it stands to-day, and many other suggestions

were made which were contemporaneously

adopted, but which were later abandoned. For the

curious-minded, reference is made to the records in

the Patent Office, which will show that up to 1893

Edison had obtained upward of sixty-five patents in

this art, from which his line of thought can be very

closely traced. The phonograph of to-day, except

for the perfection of its mechanical features, in its

beauty of manufacture and design, and in small details,

may be considered identical with the machine

of 1889, with the exception that with the latter the

rotation of the record cylinder was effected by an

electric motor.



Its essential use as then contemplated was as a

substitute for stenographers, and the most extravagant

fancies were indulged in as to utility in that

field. To exploit the device commercially, the patents

were sold to Philadelphia capitalists, who organized

the North American Phonograph Company, through

which leases for limited periods were granted to local

companies doing business in special territories, gen-

erally within the confines of a single State. Under

that plan, resembling the methods of 1878, the machines

and blank cylinders were manufactured by the

Edison Phonograph Works, which still retains its

factories at Orange, New Jersey. The marketing

enterprise was early doomed to failure, principally

because the instruments were not well understood,

and did not possess the necessary refinements that

would fit them for the special field in which they were

to be used. At first the instruments were leased;

but it was found that the leases were seldom renewed.

Efforts were then made to sell them, but the prices

were high--from $100 to $150. In the midst of these

difficulties, the chief promoter of the enterprise, Mr.

Lippincott, died; and it was soon found that the

roseate dreams of success entertained by the sanguine

promoters were not to be realized. The North American

Phonograph Company failed, its principal creditor

being Mr. Edison, who, having acquired the

assets of the defunct concern, organized the National

Phonograph Company, to which he turned over the

patents; and with characteristic energy he attempted

again to build up a business with which his favorite

and, to him, most interesting invention might be

successfully identified. The National Phonograph

Company from the very start determined to retire at

least temporarily from the field of stenographic use,

and to exploit the phonograph for musical purposes as

a competitor of the music-box. Hence it was necessary

that for such work the relatively heavy and expensive

electric motor should be discarded, and a simple

spring motor constructed with a sufficiently sensitive

governor to permit accurate musical reproduction.

Such a motor was designed, and is now used on all

phonographs except on such special instruments as

may be made with electric motors, as well as on the

successful apparatus that has more recently been

designed and introduced for stenographic use. Improved

factory facilities were introduced; new tools

were made, and various types of machines were designed

so that phonographs can now be bought at

prices ranging from $10 to $200. Even with the

changes which were thus made in the two machines,

the work of developing the business was slow, as a

demand had to be created; and the early prejudice

of the public against the phonograph, due to its failure

as a stenographic apparatus, had to be overcome.

The story of the phonograph as an industrial enterprise,

from this point of departure, is itself full of

interest, but embraces so many details that it is

necessarily given in a separate later chapter. We must

return to the days of 1878, when Edison, with at

least three first-class inventions to his credit--the

quadruplex, the carbon telephone, and the phonograph

--had become a man of mark and a "world

character."



The invention of the phonograph was immediately

followed, as usual, by the appearance of several other

incidental and auxiliary devices, some patented, and

others remaining simply the application of the principles

of apparatus that had been worked out. One

of these was the telephonograph, a combination of a

telephone at a distant station with a phonograph.

The diaphragm of the phonograph mouthpiece is

actuated by an electromagnet in the same way as

that of an ordinary telephone receiver, and in this

manner a record of the message spoken from a distance

can be obtained and turned into sound at will.

Evidently such a process is reversible, and the

phonograph can send a message to the distant receiver.



This idea was brilliantly demonstrated in practice

in February, 1889, by Mr. W. J. Hammer, one of

Edison's earliest and most capable associates, who

carried on telephonographic communication between

New York and an audience in Philadelphia. The

record made in New York on the Edison phonograph

was repeated into an Edison carbon transmitter, sent

over one hundred and three miles of circuit, including

six miles of underground cable; received by an Edison

motograph; repeated by that on to a phonograph;

transferred from the phonograph to an Edison carbon

transmitter, and by that delivered to the Edison

motograph receiver in the enthusiastic lecture-hall,

where every one could hear each sound and syllable

distinctly. In real practice this spectacular playing

with sound vibrations, as if they were lacrosse balls

to toss around between the goals, could be materially

simplified.



The modern megaphone, now used universally in

making announcements to large crowds, particularly

at sporting events, is also due to this period as a

perfection by Edison of many antecedent devices going

back, perhaps, much further than the legendary

funnels through which Alexander the Great is said

to have sent commands to his outlying forces. The

improved Edison megaphone for long-distance work

comprised two horns of wood or metal about six feet

long, tapering from a diameter of two feet six inches

at the mouth to a small aperture provided with ear-

tubes. These converging horns or funnels, with a

large speaking-trumpet in between them, are mounted

on a tripod, and the megaphone is complete.

Conversation can be carried on with this megaphone

at a distance of over two miles, as with a ship or

the balloon. The modern megaphone now employs

the receiver form thus introduced as its very effective

transmitter, with which the old-fashioned speaking-

trumpet cannot possibly compete; and the word

"megaphone" is universally applied to the single,

side-flaring horn.



A further step in this line brought Edison to the

"aerophone," around which the Figaro weaved its

fanciful description. In the construction of the aerophone

the same kind of tympanum is used as in the

phonograph, but the imitation of the human voice,

or the transmission of sound, is effected by the quick

opening and closing of valves placed within a steam-

whistle or an organ-pipe. The vibrations of the

diaphragm communicated to the valves cause them

to operate in synchronism, so that the vibrations are

thrown upon the escaping air or steam; and the result

is an instrument with a capacity of magnifying

the sounds two hundred times, and of hurling them

to great distances intelligibly, like a huge fog-siren,

but with immense clearness and penetration. All

this study of sound transmission over long distances

without wires led up to the consideration and inven-

tion of pioneer apparatus for wireless telegraphy--

but that also is another chapter.



Yet one more ingenious device of this period must

be noted--Edison's vocal engine, the patent application

for which was executed in August, 1878, the

patent being granted the following December. Reference

to this by Edison himself has already been

quoted. The "voice-engine," or "phonomotor," converts

the vibrations of the voice or of music, acting

on the diaphragm, into motion which is utilized to

drive some secondary appliance, whether as a toy

or for some useful purpose. Thus a man can actually

talk a hole through a board.



Somewhat weary of all this work and excitement,

and not having enjoyed any cessation from toil, or

period of rest, for ten years, Edison jumped eagerly

at the opportunity afforded him in the summer of

1878 of making a westward trip. Just thirty years

later, on a similar trip over the same ground, he

jotted down for this volume some of his reminiscences.

The lure of 1878 was the opportunity to try

the ability of his delicate tasimeter during the total

eclipse of the sun, July 29. His admiring friend, Prof.

George F. Barker, of the University of Pennsylvania,

with whom he had now been on terms of intimacy

for some years, suggested the holiday, and was himself

a member of the excursion party that made its

rendezvous at Rawlins, Wyoming Territory. Edison

had tested his tasimeter, and was satisfied that it

would measure down to the millionth part of a

degree Fahrenheit. It was just ten years since he

had left the West in poverty and obscurity, a penni-

less operator in search of a job; but now he was a

great inventor and famous, a welcome addition to

the band of astronomers and physicists assembled

to observe the eclipse and the corona.



"There were astronomers from nearly every nation,"

says Mr. Edison. "We had a special car.

The country at that time was rather new; game was

in great abundance, and could be seen all day long

from the car window, especially antelope. We arrived

at Rawlins about 4 P.M. It had a small machine

shop, and was the point where locomotives

were changed for the next section. The hotel was a

very small one, and by doubling up we were barely

accommodated. My room-mate was Fox, the correspondent

of the New York Herald. After we retired

and were asleep a thundering knock on the door

awakened us. Upon opening the door a tall, handsome

man with flowing hair dressed in western style

entered the room. His eyes were bloodshot, and he

was somewhat inebriated. He introduced himself as

`Texas Jack'--Joe Chromondo--and said he wanted

to see Edison, as he had read about me in the newspapers.

Both Fox and I were rather scared, and

didn't know what was to be the result of the interview.

The landlord requested him not to make so

much noise, and was thrown out into the hall. Jack

explained that he had just come in with a party

which had been hunting, and that he felt fine. He

explained, also, that he was the boss pistol-shot of

the West; that it was he who taught the celebrated

Doctor Carver how to shoot. Then suddenly pointing

to a weather-vane on the freight depot, he pulled

out a Colt revolver and fired through the window,

hitting the vane. The shot awakened all the people,

and they rushed in to see who was killed. It was

only after I told him I was tired and would see him

in the morning that he left. Both Fox and I were so

nervous we didn't sleep any that night.



"We were told in the morning that Jack was a

pretty good fellow, and was not one of the `bad

men,' of whom they had a good supply. They had

one in the jail, and Fox and I went over to see him. A

few days before he had held up a Union Pacific train

and robbed all the passengers. In the jail also was a

half-breed horse-thief. We interviewed the bad man

through bars as big as railroad rails. He looked like

a `bad man.' The rim of his ear all around came

to a sharp edge and was serrated. His eyes were nearly

white, and appeared as if made of glass and set in

wrong, like the life-size figures of Indians in the

Smithsonian Institution. His face was also extremely

irregular. He wouldn't answer a single question.

I learned afterward that he got seven years in prison,

while the horse-thief was hanged. As horses ran

wild, and there was no protection, it meant death

to steal one."



This was one interlude among others. "The first

thing the astronomers did was to determine with

precision their exact locality upon the earth. A number

of observations were made, and Watson, of Michigan

University, with two others, worked all night

computing, until they agreed. They said they were

not in error more than one hundred feet, and that

the station was twelve miles out of the position given

on the maps. It seemed to take an immense amount

of mathematics. I preserved one of the sheets, which

looked like the time-table of a Chinese railroad. The

instruments of the various parties were then set up

in different parts of the little town, and got ready

for the eclipse which was to occur in three or four days.

Two days before the event we all got together, and

obtaining an engine and car, went twelve miles

farther west to visit the United States Government

astronomers at a place called Separation, the apex

of the Great Divide, where the waters run east to the

Mississippi and west to the Pacific. Fox and I took

our Winchester rifles with an idea of doing a little

shooting. After calling on the Government people

we started to interview the telegraph operator at this

most lonely and desolate spot. After talking over old

acquaintances I asked him if there was any game

around. He said, `Plenty of jack-rabbits.' These

jack-rabbits are a very peculiar species. They have

ears about six inches long and very slender legs,

about three times as long as those of an ordinary

rabbit, and travel at a great speed by a series of

jumps, each about thirty feet long, as near as I could

judge. The local people called them `narrow-gauge

mules.' Asking the operator the best direction, he

pointed west, and noticing a rabbit in a clear space

in the sage bushes, I said, `There is one now.' I

advanced cautiously to within one hundred feet and

shot. The rabbit paid no attention. I then advanced

to within ten feet and shot again--the rabbit

was still immovable. On looking around, the whole

crowd at the station were watching--and then I

knew the rabbit was stuffed! However, we did shoot

a number of live ones until Fox ran out of cartridges.

On returning to the station I passed away the time

shooting at cans set on a pile of tins. Finally the

operator said to Fox: `I have a fine Springfield

musket, suppose you try it!' So Fox took the

musket and fired. It knocked him nearly over. It

seems that the musket had been run over by a handcar,

which slightly bent the long barrel, but not

sufficiently for an amateur like Fox to notice. After

Fox had his shoulder treated with arnica at the

Government hospital tent, we returned to Rawlins."



The eclipse was, however, the prime consideration,

and Edison followed the example of his colleagues in

making ready. The place which he secured for setting

up his tasimeter was an enclosure hardly suitable

for the purpose, and he describes the results as follows:



"I had my apparatus in a small yard enclosed by

a board fence six feet high, at one end there was a

house for hens. I noticed that they all went to roost

just before totality. At the same time a slight wind

arose, and at the moment of totality the atmosphere

was filled with thistle-down and other light articles.

I noticed one feather, whose weight was at least one

hundred and fifty milligrams, rise perpendicularly to

the top of the fence, where it floated away on the

wind. My apparatus was entirely too sensitive, and

I got no results." It was found that the heat from

the corona of the sun was ten times the index capacity

of the instrument; but this result did not leave the

value of the device in doubt. The Scientific American

remarked;



"Seeing that the tasimeter is affected by a wider range

of etheric undulations than the eye can take cognizance

of, and is withal far more acutely sensitive, the probabilities

are that it will open up hitherto inaccessible

regions of space, and possibly extend the range of aerial

knowledge as far beyond the limit obtained by the telescope

as that is beyond the narrow reach of unaided

vision."





The eclipse over, Edison, with Professor Barker,

Major Thornberg, several soldiers, and a number of

railroad officials, went hunting about one hundred

miles south of the railroad in the Ute country. A

few months later the Major and thirty soldiers were

ambushed near the spot at which the hunting-party

had camped, and all were killed. Through an introduction

from Mr. Jay Gould, who then controlled the

Union Pacific, Edison was allowed to ride on the

cow-catchers of the locomotives. "The different

engineers gave me a small cushion, and every day I

rode in this manner, from Omaha to the Sacramento

Valley, except through the snow-shed on the summit

of the Sierras, without dust or anything else to

obstruct the view. Only once was I in danger when

the locomotive struck an animal about the size of

a small cub bear--which I think was a badger. This

animal struck the front of the locomotive just under

the headlight with great violence, and was then

thrown off by the rebound. I was sitting to one side

grasping the angle brace, so no harm was done."



This welcome vacation lasted nearly two months;

but Edison was back in his laboratory and hard at

work before the end of August, gathering up many

loose ends, and trying out many thoughts and ideas

that had accumulated on the trip. One hot afternoon

--August 30th, as shown by the document in

the case--Mr. Edison was found by one of the authors

of this biography employed most busily in making

a mysterious series of tests on paper, using for ink

acids that corrugated and blistered the paper where

written upon. When interrogated as to his object,

he stated that the plan was to afford blind people

the means of writing directly to each other, especially

if they were also deaf and could not hear a message

on the phonograph. The characters which he was

thus forming on the paper were high enough in relief

to be legible to the delicate touch of a blind man's

fingers, and with simple apparatus letters could be

thus written, sent, and read. There was certainly

no question as to the result obtained at the moment,

which was all that was asked; but the Edison autograph

thus and then written now shows the paper

eaten out by the acid used, although covered with

glass for many years. Mr. Edison does not remember

that he ever recurred to this very interesting test.



He was, however, ready for anything new or novel,

and no record can ever be made or presented that

would do justice to a tithe of the thoughts and fancies

daily and hourly put upon the rack. The famous

note-books, to which reference will be made later,

were not begun as a regular series, as it was only the

profusion of these ideas that suggested the vital value

of such systematic registration. Then as now, the

propositions brought to Edison ranged over every

conceivable subject, but the years have taught him

caution in grappling with them. He tells an amusing

story of one dilemma into which his good-nature led

him at this period: "At Menlo Park one day, a farmer

came in and asked if I knew any way to kill potato-

bugs. He had twenty acres of potatoes, and the

vines were being destroyed. I sent men out and

culled two quarts of bugs, and tried every chemical

I had to destroy them. Bisulphide of carbon was

found to do it instantly. I got a drum and went over

to the potato farm and sprinkled it on the vines with

a pot. Every bug dropped dead. The next morning

the farmer came in very excited and reported that

the stuff had killed the vines as well. I had to pay

$300 for not experimenting properly."



During this year, 1878, the phonograph made its

way also to Europe, and various sums of money were

paid there to secure the rights to its manufacture and

exploitation. In England, for example, the Microscopic

Company paid $7500 down and agreed to a

royalty, while arrangements were effected also in

France, Russia, and other countries. In every instance,

as in this country, the commercial development

had to wait several years, for in the mean time

another great art had been brought into existence,

demanding exclusive attention and exhaustive toil.

And when the work was done the reward was a new

heaven and a new earth--in the art of illumination.


