




CHAPTER VII



THE STOCK TICKER





"THE letters and figures used in the language of

the tape," said a well-known Boston stock

speculator, "are very few, but they spell ruin in

ninety-nine million ways." It is not to be inferred,

however, that the modern stock ticker has anything

to do with the making or losing of fortunes. There

were regular daily stock-market reports in London

newspapers in 1825, and New York soon followed the

example. As far back as 1692, Houghton issued in

London a weekly review of financial and commercial

transactions, upon which Macaulay based the lively

narrative of stock speculation in the seventeenth

century, given in his famous history. That which

the ubiquitous stock ticker has done is to give

instantaneity to the news of what the stock market is

doing, so that at every minute, thousands of miles

apart, brokers, investors, and gamblers may learn

the exact conditions. The existence of such facilities

is to be admired rather than deplored. News is vital

to Wall Street, and there is no living man on whom

the doings in Wall Street are without effect. The

financial history of the United States and of the world,

as shown by the prices of government bonds and

general securities, has been told daily for forty years

on these narrow strips of paper tape, of which thousands

of miles are run yearly through the "tickers"

of New York alone. It is true that the record of the

chattering little machine, made in cabalistic abbreviations

on the tape, can drive a man suddenly to the

very verge of insanity with joy or despair; but if

there be blame for that, it attaches to the American

spirit of speculation and not to the ingenious mechanism

which reads and registers the beating of the

financial pulse.



Edison came first to New York in 1868, with his

early stock printer, which he tried unsuccessfully to

sell. He went back to Boston, and quite undismayed

got up a duplex telegraph. "Toward the end

of my stay in Boston," he says, "I obtained a loan

of money, amounting to $800, to build a peculiar

kind of duplex telegraph for sending two messages

over a single wire simultaneously. The apparatus

was built, and I left the Western Union employ and

went to Rochester, New York, to test the apparatus

on the lines of the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph between

that city and New York. But the assistant at

the other end could not be made to understand anything,

notwithstanding I had written out a very

minute description of just what to do. After trying

for a week I gave it up and returned to New York

with but a few cents in my pocket." Thus he who

has never speculated in a stock in his life was destined

to make the beginnings of his own fortune by providing

for others the apparatus that should bring to the

eye, all over a great city, the momentary fluctuations

of stocks and bonds. No one could have been in

direr poverty than he when the steamboat landed

him in New York in 1869. He was in debt, and his

few belongings in books and instruments had to be

left behind. He was not far from starving. Mr.

W. S. Mallory, an associate of many years, quotes

directly from him on this point: "Some years ago

we had a business negotiation in New York which

made it necessary for Mr. Edison and me to visit the

city five or six times within a comparatively short

period. It was our custom to leave Orange about

11 A.M., and on arrival in New York to get our lunch

before keeping the appointments, which were usually

made for two o'clock. Several of these lunches were

had at Delmonico's, Sherry's, and other places of

similar character, but one day, while en route, Mr.

Edison said: `I have been to lunch with you several

times; now to-day I am going to take you to lunch

with me, and give you the finest lunch you ever had.'

When we arrived in Hoboken, we took the downtown

ferry across the Hudson, and when we arrived

on the Manhattan side Mr. Edison led the way to

Smith & McNell's, opposite Washington Market, and

well known to old New Yorkers. We went inside and

as soon as the waiter appeared Mr. Edison ordered

apple dumplings and a cup of coffee for himself. He

consumed his share of the lunch with the greatest

possible pleasure. Then, as soon as he had finished,

he went to the cigar counter and purchased cigars.

As we walked to keep the appointment he gave me

the following reminiscence: When he left Boston and

decided to come to New York he had only money

enough for the trip. After leaving the boat his first

thought was of breakfast; but he was without money

to obtain it. However, in passing a wholesale tea-

house he saw a man tasting tea, so he went in and

asked the `taster' if he might have some of the tea.

This the man gave him, and thus he obtained his first

breakfast in New York. He knew a telegraph operator

here, and on him he depended for a loan to tide

him over until such time as he should secure a position.

During the day he succeeded in locating this operator,

but found that he also was out of a job, and that the

best he could do was to loan him one dollar, which

he did. This small sum of money represented both

food and lodging until such time as work could be

obtained. Edison said that as the result of the time

consumed and the exercise in walking while he found

his friend, he was extremely hungry, and that he gave

most serious consideration as to what he should buy

in the way of food, and what particular kind of food

would be most satisfying and filling. The result was

that at Smith & McNell's he decided on apple dumplings

and a cup of coffee, than which he never ate anything

more appetizing. It was not long before he

was at work and was able to live in a normal manner."



During the Civil War, with its enormous increase

in the national debt and the volume of paper money,

gold had gone to a high premium; and, as ever, by its

fluctuations in price the value of all other commodities

was determined. This led to the creation of a

"Gold Room" in Wall Street, where the precious

metal could be dealt in; while for dealings in stocks

there also existed the "Regular Board," the "Open

Board," and the "Long Room." Devoted to one,

but the leading object of speculation, the "Gold

Room" was the very focus of all the financial and

gambling activity of the time, and its quotations

governed trade and commerce. At first notations in

chalk on a blackboard sufficed, but seeing their

inadequacy, Dr. S. S. Laws, vice-president and actual

presiding officer of the Gold Exchange, devised and

introduced what was popularly known as the "gold

indicator." This exhibited merely the prevailing

price of gold; but as its quotations changed from

instant to instant, it was in a most literal sense "the

cynosure of neighboring eyes." One indicator looked

upon the Gold Room; the other opened toward the

street. Within the exchange the face could easily be

seen high up on the west wall of the room, and the

machine was operated by Mr. Mersereau, the official

registrar of the Gold Board.



Doctor Laws, who afterward became President of

the State University of Missouri, was an inventor of

unusual ability and attainments. In his early youth

he had earned his livelihood in a tool factory; and,

apparently with his savings, he went to Princeton,

where he studied electricity under no less a teacher

than the famous Joseph Henry. At the outbreak of

the war in 1861 he was president of one of the

Presbyterian synodical colleges in the South, whose

buildings passed into the hands of the Government.

Going to Europe, he returned to New York in 1863,

and, becoming interested with a relative in financial

matters, his connection with the Gold Exchange soon

followed, when it was organized. The indicating

mechanism he now devised was electrical, controlled

at central by two circuit-closing keys, and was a

prototype of all the later and modern step-by-step printing

telegraphs, upon which the distribution of financial

news depends. The "fraction" drum of the indicator

could be driven in either direction, known as

the advance and retrograde movements, and was

divided and marked in eighths. It geared into a

"unit" drum, just as do speed-indicators and

cyclometers. Four electrical pulsations were required to

move the drum the distance between the fractions.

The general operation was simple, and in normally

active times the mechanism and the registrar were

equal to all emergencies. But it is obvious that the

record had to be carried away to the brokers' offices

and other places by messengers; and the delay,

confusion, and mistakes soon suggested to Doctor Laws

the desirability of having a number of indicators at

such scattered points, operated by a master transmitter,

and dispensing with the regiments of noisy

boys. He secured this privilege of distribution, and,

resigning from the exchange, devoted his exclusive

attention to the "Gold Reporting Telegraph," which

he patented, and for which, at the end of 1866, he

had secured fifty subscribers. His indicators were

small oblong boxes, in the front of which was a long

slot, allowing the dials as they travelled past, inside,

to show the numerals constituting the quotation;

the dials or wheels being arranged in a row

horizontally, overlapping each other, as in modern fare

registers which are now seen on most trolley cars.

It was not long before there were three hundred

subscribers; but the very success of this device brought

competition and improvement. Mr. E. A. Callahan,

an ingenious printing-telegraph operator, saw that

there were unexhausted possibilities in the idea, and

his foresight and inventiveness made him the father

of the "ticker," in connection with which he was

thus, like Laws, one of the first to grasp and exploit

the underlying principle of the "central station" as

a universal source of supply. The genesis of his

invention Mr. Callahan has told in an interesting way:

"In 1867, on the site of the present Mills Building on

Broad Street, opposite the Stock Exchange of today,

was an old building which had been cut up to

subserve the necessities of its occupants, all engaged

in dealing in gold and stocks. It had one main entrance

from the street to a hallway, from which entrance

to the offices of two prominent broker firms

was obtained. Each firm had its own army of boys,

numbering from twelve to fifteen, whose duties were

to ascertain the latest quotations from the different

exchanges. Each boy devoted his attention to some

particularly active stock. Pushing each other to

get into these narrow quarters, yelling out the prices

at the door, and pushing back for later ones, the

hustle made this doorway to me a most undesirable

refuge from an April shower. I was simply whirled

into the street. I naturally thought that much of

this noise and confusion might be dispensed with, and

that the prices might be furnished through some

system of telegraphy which would not require the

employment of skilled operators. The conception of

the stock ticker dates from this incident."



Mr. Callahan's first idea was to distribute gold

quotations, and to this end he devised an "indicator."

It consisted of two dials mounted separately, each

revolved by an electromagnet, so that the desired

figures were brought to an aperture in the case

enclosing the apparatus, as in the Laws system. Each

shaft with its dial was provided with two ratchet

wheels, one the reverse of the other. One was used in

connection with the propelling lever, which was provided

with a pawl to fit into the teeth of the reversed

ratchet wheel on its forward movement. It was thus

made impossible for either dial to go by momentum

beyond its limit. Learning that Doctor Laws, with

the skilful aid of F. L. Pope, was already active in the

same direction, Mr. Callahan, with ready wit, transformed

his indicator into a "ticker" that would make

a printed record. The name of the "ticker" came

through the casual remark of an observer to whom

the noise was the most striking feature of the

mechanism. Mr. Callahan removed the two dials, and,

substituting type wheels, turned the movements face

to face, so that each type wheel could imprint its

characters upon a paper tape in two lines. Three

wires stranded together ran from the central office

to each instrument. Of these one furnished the current

for the alphabet wheel, one for the figure wheel,

and one for the mechanism that took care of the

inking and printing on the tape. Callahan made the

further innovation of insulating his circuit wires,

although the cost was then forty times as great as

that of bare wire. It will be understood that

electromagnets were the ticker's actuating agency. The

ticker apparatus was placed under a neat glass shade

and mounted on a shelf. Twenty-five instruments

were energized from one circuit, and the quotations

were supplied from a "central" at 18 New Street.

The Gold & Stock Telegraph Company was promptly

organized to supply to brokers the system, which

was very rapidly adopted throughout the financial

district of New York, at the southern tip of Manhattan

Island. Quotations were transmitted by the

Morse telegraph from the floor of the Stock Exchange

to the "central," and thence distributed to the

subscribers. Success with the "stock" news system was

instantaneous.



It was at this juncture that Edison reached New

York, and according to his own statement found

shelter at night in the battery-room of the Gold

Indicator Company, having meantime applied for a

position as operator with the Western Union. He

had to wait a few days, and during this time he seized

the opportunity to study the indicators and the complicated

general transmitter in the office, controlled

from the keyboard of the operator on the floor of the

Gold Exchange. What happened next has been the

basis of many inaccurate stories, but is dramatic

enough as told in Mr. Edison's own version: "On the

third day of my arrival and while sitting in the office,

the complicated general instrument for sending on all

the lines, and which made a very great noise, suddenly

came to a stop with a crash. Within two minutes

over three hundred boys--a boy from every broker

in the street--rushed up-stairs and crowded the long

aisle and office, that hardly had room for one hundred,

all yelling that such and such a broker's wire was out

of order and to fix it at once. It was pandemonium,

and the man in charge became so excited that he lost

control of all the knowledge he ever had. I went to

the indicator, and, having studied it thoroughly, knew

where the trouble ought to be, and found it. One of

the innumerable contact springs had broken off and

had fallen down between the two gear wheels and

stopped the instrument; but it was not very noticeable.

As I went out to tell the man in charge what

the matter was, Doctor Laws appeared on the scene,

the most excited person I had seen. He demanded

of the man the cause of the trouble, but the man was

speechless. I ventured to say that I knew what the

trouble was, and he said, `Fix it! Fix it! Be quick!'

I removed the spring and set the contact wheels at

zero; and the line, battery, and inspecting men all

scattered through the financial district to set the

instruments. In about two hours things were working

again. Doctor Laws came in to ask my name and

what I was doing. I told him, and he asked me to

come to his private office the following day. His

office was filled with stacks of books all relating to

metaphysics and kindred matters. He asked me a

great many questions about the instruments and his

system, and I showed him how he could simplify

things generally. He then requested that I should

call next day. On arrival, he stated at once that

he had decided to put me in charge of the whole

plant, and that my salary would be $300 per month!

This was such a violent jump from anything I had

ever seen before, that it rather paralyzed me for a

while, I thought it was too much to be lasting, but

I determined to try and live up to that salary if

twenty hours a day of hard work would do it. I

kept this position, made many improvements, devised

several stock tickers, until the Gold & Stock

Telegraph Company consolidated with the Gold Indicator

Company." Certainly few changes in fortune

have been more sudden and dramatic in any

notable career than this which thus placed an ill-

clad, unkempt, half-starved, eager lad in a position

of such responsibility in days when the fluctuations

in the price of gold at every instant meant fortune or

ruin to thousands.



Edison, barely twenty-one years old, was a keen

observer of the stirring events around him. "Wall

Street" is at any time an interesting study, but it

was never at a more agitated and sensational period

of its history than at this time. Edison's arrival in

New York coincided with an active speculation in

gold which may, indeed, be said to have provided him

with occupation; and was soon followed by the attempt

of Mr. Jay Gould and his associates to corner

the gold market, precipitating the panic of Black

Friday, September 24, 1869. Securing its import

duties in the precious metal and thus assisting to

create an artificial stringency in the gold market, the

Government had made it a practice to relieve the

situation by selling a million of gold each month.

The metal was thus restored to circulation. In some

manner, President Grant was persuaded that general

conditions and the movement of the crops would be

helped if the sale of gold were suspended for a time;

and, this put into effect, he went to visit an old

friend in Pennsylvania remote from railroads and

telegraphs. The Gould pool had acquired control of

$10,000,000 in gold, and drove the price upward

rapidly from 144 toward their goal of 200. On Black

Friday they purchased another $28,000,000 at 160,

and still the price went up. The financial and

commercial interests of the country were in panic; but

the pool persevered in its effort to corner gold, with

a profit of many millions contingent on success.

Yielding to frantic requests, President Grant, who

returned to Washington, caused Secretary Boutwell,

of the Treasury, to throw $4,000,000 of gold into the

market. Relief was instantaneous, the corner was

broken, but the harm had been done. Edison's remarks

shed a vivid side-light on this extraordinary

episode: "On Black Friday," he says, "we had a

very exciting time with the indicators. The Gould

and Fisk crowd had cornered gold, and had run the

quotations up faster than the indicator could follow.

The indicator was composed of several wheels; on

the circumference of each wheel were the numerals;

and one wheel had fractions. It worked in the same

way as an ordinary counter; one wheel made ten

revolutions, and at the tenth it advanced the adjacent

wheel; and this in its turn having gone ten revolutions,

advanced the next wheel, and so on. On the

morning of Black Friday the indicator was quoting

150 premium, whereas the bids by Gould's agents in

the Gold Room were 165 for five millions or any part.

We had a paper-weight at the transmitter (to speed

it up), and by one o'clock reached the right quotation.

The excitement was prodigious. New Street,

as well as Broad Street, was jammed with excited

people. I sat on the top of the Western Union telegraph

booth to watch the surging, crazy crowd. One

man came to the booth, grabbed a pencil, and

attempted to write a message to Boston. The first

stroke went clear off the blank; he was so excited that

he had the operator write the message for him. Amid

great excitement Speyer, the banker, went crazy and

it took five men to hold him; and everybody lost their

head. The Western Union operator came to me and

said: `Shake, Edison, we are O. K. We haven't got

a cent.' I felt very happy because we were poor.

These occasions are very enjoyable to a poor man;

but they occur rarely."



There is a calm sense of detachment about this

description that has been possessed by the narrator

even in the most anxious moments of his career. He

was determined to see all that could be seen, and,

quitting his perch on the telegraph booth, sought the

more secluded headquarters of the pool forces. "A

friend of mine was an operator who worked in the

office of Belden & Company, 60 Broadway, which

were headquarters for Fisk. Mr. Gould was up-town

in the Erie offices in the Grand Opera House. The firm

on Broad Street, Smith, Gould & Martin, was the other

branch. All were connected with wires. Gould seemed

to be in charge, Fisk being the executive down-town.

Fisk wore a velvet corduroy coat and a very peculiar

vest. He was very chipper, and seemed to be light-

hearted and happy. Sitting around the room were

about a dozen fine-looking men. All had the complexion

of cadavers. There was a basket of cham-

pagne. Hundreds of boys were rushing in paying

checks, all checks being payable to Belden & Company.

When James Brown, of Brown Brothers &

Company, broke the corner by selling five million

gold, all payments were repudiated by Smith, Gould

& Martin; but they continued to receive checks at

Belden & Company's for some time, until the Street

got wind of the game. There was some kind of conspiracy

with the Government people which I could

not make out, but I heard messages that opened my

eyes as to the ramifications of Wall Street. Gold fell

to 132, and it took us all night to get the indicator

back to that quotation. All night long the streets

were full of people. Every broker's office was brilliantly

lighted all night, and all hands were at work.

The clearing-house for gold had been swamped, and

all was mixed up. No one knew if he was bankrupt

or not."



Edison in those days rather liked the modest coffee-

shops, and mentions visiting one. "When on the

New York No. 1 wire, that I worked in Boston, there

was an operator named Jerry Borst at the other end.

He was a first-class receiver and rapid sender. We

made up a scheme to hold this wire, so he changed

one letter of the alphabet and I soon got used to it;

and finally we changed three letters. If any operator

tried to receive from Borst, he couldn't do it, so Borst

and I always worked together. Borst did less talking

than any operator I ever knew. Never having seen

him, I went while in New York to call upon him. I

did all the talking. He would listen, stroke his

beard, and say nothing. In the evening I went over

to an all-night lunch-house in Printing House Square

in a basement--Oliver's. Night editors, including

Horace Greeley, and Henry Raymond, of the New

York Times, took their midnight lunch there. When

I went with Borst and another operator, they pointed

out two or three men who were then celebrated in the

newspaper world. The night was intensely hot and

close. After getting our lunch and upon reaching the

sidewalk, Borst opened his mouth, and said: `That's

a great place; a plate of cakes, a cup of coffee, and

a Russian bath, for ten cents.' This was about fifty

per cent. of his conversation for two days."



The work of Edison on the gold-indicator had

thrown him into close relationship with Mr. Franklin

L. Pope, the young telegraph engineer then associated

with Doctor Laws, and afterward a distinguished

expert and technical writer, who became

President of the American Institute of Electrical

Engineers in 1886. Each recognized the special ability

of the other, and barely a week after the famous

events of Black Friday the announcement of their

partnership appeared in the Telegrapher of October

1, 1869. This was the first "professional card," if

it may be so described, ever issued in America by a

firm of electrical engineers, and is here reproduced.

It is probable that the advertisement, one of the largest

in the Telegrapher, and appearing frequently, was

not paid for at full rates, as the publisher, Mr. J. N.

Ashley, became a partner in the firm, and not altogether

a "sleeping one" when it came to a division

of profits, which at times were considerable. In

order to be nearer his new friend Edison boarded with

Pope at Elizabeth, New Jersey, for some time, living

"the strenuous life" in the performance of his duties.

Associated with Pope and Ashley, he followed up his

work on telegraph printers with marked success.

"While with them I devised a printer to print gold

quotations instead of indicating them. The lines were

started, and the whole was sold out to the Gold &

Stock Telegraph Company. My experimenting was

all done in the small shop of a Doctor Bradley,

located near the station of the Pennsylvania Railroad

in Jersey City. Every night I left for Elizabeth on

the 1 A.M. train, then walked half a mile to Mr. Pope's

house and up at 6 A.M. for breakfast to catch the

7 A.M. train. This continued all winter, and many

were the occasions when I was nearly frozen in the

Elizabeth walk." This Doctor Bradley appears to

have been the first in this country to make electrical

measurements of precision with the galvanometer,

but was an old-school experimenter who would work

for years on an instrument without commercial value.

He was also extremely irascible, and when on one

occasion the connecting wire would not come out of

one of the binding posts of a new and costly galvanometer,

he jerked the instrument to the floor and then

jumped on it. He must have been, however, a man

of originality, as evidenced by his attempt to age

whiskey by electricity, an attempt that has often

since been made. "The hobby he had at the time

I was there," says Edison, "was the aging of raw

whiskey by passing strong electric currents through

it. He had arranged twenty jars with platinum

electrodes held in place by hard rubber. When all

was ready, he filled the cells with whiskey, connected

the battery, locked the door of the small room in

which they were placed, and gave positive orders

that no one should enter. He then disappeared for

three days. On the second day we noticed a terrible

smell in the shop, as if from some dead animal. The

next day the doctor arrived and, noticing the smell,

asked what was dead. We all thought something

had got into his whiskey-room and died. He opened

it and was nearly overcome. The hard rubber he

used was, of course, full of sulphur, and this being

attacked by the nascent hydrogen, had produced

sulphuretted hydrogen gas in torrents, displacing all

of the air in the room. Sulphuretted hydrogen is,

as is well known, the gas given off by rotten eggs."



Another glimpse of this period of development is

afforded by an interesting article on the stock-reporting

telegraph in the Electrical World of March 4, 1899,

by Mr. Ralph W. Pope, the well-known Secretary of

the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, who

had as a youth an active and intimate connection

with that branch of electrical industry. In the course

of his article he mentions the curious fact that Doctor

Laws at first, in receiving quotations from the Exchanges,

was so distrustful of the Morse system that

he installed long lines of speaking-tube as a more

satisfactory and safe device than a telegraph wire.

As to the relations of that time Mr. Pope remarks:

"The rivalry between the two concerns resulted in

consolidation, Doctor Laws's enterprise being

absorbed by the Gold & Stock Telegraph Company,

while the Laws stock printer was relegated to the

scrap-heap and the museum. Competition in the

field did not, however, cease. Messrs. Pope and

Edison invented a one-wire printer, and started a

system of `gold printers' devoted to the recording

of gold quotations and sterling exchange only. It

was intended more especially for importers and

exchange brokers, and was furnished at a lower price

than the indicator service.... The building and

equipment of private telegraph lines was also entered

upon. This business was also subsequently absorbed

by the Gold & Stock Telegraph Company, which was

probably at this time at the height of its prosperity.

The financial organization of the company was peculiar

and worthy of attention. Each subscriber for

a machine paid in $100 for the privilege of securing

an instrument. For the service he paid $25 weekly.

In case he retired or failed, he could transfer his

`right,' and employees were constantly on the alert

for purchasable rights, which could be disposed of

at a profit. It was occasionally worth the profit to

convince a man that he did not actually own the

machine which had been placed in his office.... The

Western Union Telegraph Company secured a majority

of its stock, and Gen. Marshall Lefferts was

elected president. A private-line department was

established, and the business taken over from Pope,

Edison, and Ashley was rapidly enlarged."



At this juncture General Lefferts, as President of

the Gold & Stock Telegraph Company, requested

Edison to go to work on improving the stock ticker,

furnishing the money; and the well-known "Universal"

ticker, in wide-spread use in its day, was one

result. Mr. Edison gives a graphic picture of the

startling effect on his fortunes: "I made a great many

inventions; one was the special ticker used for many

years outside of New York in the large cities. This

was made exceedingly simple, as they did not have

the experts we had in New York to handle anything

complicated. The same ticker was used on the London

Stock Exchange. After I had made a great number

of inventions and obtained patents, the General

seemed anxious that the matter should be closed up.

One day I exhibited and worked a successful device

whereby if a ticker should get out of unison in a

broker's office and commence to print wild figures,

it could be brought to unison from the central station,

which saved the labor of many men and much trouble

to the broker. He called me into his office, and said:

`Now, young man, I want to close up the matter of

your inventions. How much do you think you should

receive?' I had made up my mind that, taking into

consideration the time and killing pace I was working

at, I should be entitled to $5000, but could get along

with $3000. When the psychological moment arrived,

I hadn't the nerve to name such a large sum,

so I said: `Well, General, suppose you make me an

offer.' Then he said: `How would $40,000 strike

you?' This caused me to come as near fainting as I

ever got. I was afraid he would hear my heart beat.

I managed to say that I thought it was fair. `All

right, I will have a contract drawn; come around in

three days and sign it, and I will give you the money.'

I arrived on time, but had been doing some considerable

thinking on the subject. The sum seemed to

be very large for the amount of work, for at that time

I determined the value by the time and trouble, and

not by what the invention was worth to others. I

thought there was something unreal about it. However,

the contract was handed to me. I signed without

reading it." Edison was then handed the first

check he had ever received, one for $40,000 drawn

on the Bank of New York, at the corner of William

and Wall Streets. On going to the bank and passing

in the check at the wicket of the paying teller, some

brief remarks were made to him, which in his deafness

he did not understand. The check was handed

back to him, and Edison, fancying for a moment that

in some way he had been cheated, went outside "to

the large steps to let the cold sweat evaporate." He

then went back to the General, who, with his secretary,

had a good laugh over the matter, told him the check

must be endorsed, and sent with him a young man

to identify him. The ceremony of identification

performed with the paying teller, who was quite merry

over the incident, Edison was given the amount in

bundles of small bills "until there certainly seemed

to be one cubic foot." Unaware that he was the victim

of a practical joke, Edison proceeded gravely to

stow away the money in his overcoat pockets and all

his other pockets. He then went to Newark and sat

up all night with the money for fear it might be

stolen. Once more he sought help next morning,

when the General laughed heartily, and, telling the

clerk that the joke must not be carried any further,

enabled him to deposit the currency in the bank and

open an account.



Thus in an inconceivably brief time had Edison

passed from poverty to independence; made a deep

impression as to his originality and ability on

important people, and brought out valuable inventions;

lifting himself at one bound out of the ruck of

mediocrity, and away from the deadening drudgery of the

key. Best of all he was enterprising, one of the

leaders and pioneers for whom the world is always

looking; and, to use his own criticism of himself, he

had "too sanguine a temperament to keep money

in solitary confinement." With quiet self-possession

he seized his opportunity, began to buy machinery,

rented a shop and got work for it. Moving quickly

into a larger shop, Nos. 10 and 12 Ward Street,

Newark, New Jersey, he secured large orders from

General Lefferts to build stock tickers, and employed

fifty men. As business increased he put on a night

force, and was his own foreman on both shifts. Half

an hour of sleep three or four times in the twenty-

four hours was all he needed in those days, when one

invention succeeded another with dazzling rapidity,

and when he worked with the fierce, eruptive energy

of a great volcano, throwing out new ideas incessantly

with spectacular effect on the arts to which they

related. It has always been a theory with Edison that

we sleep altogether too much; but on the other hand

he never, until long past fifty, knew or practiced the

slightest moderation in work or in the use of strong

coffee and black cigars. He has, moreover, while

of tender and kindly disposition, never hesitated to

use men up as freely as a Napoleon or Grant; seeing

only the goal of a complete invention or perfected de-

vice, to attain which all else must become subsidiary.

He gives a graphic picture of his first methods as a

manufacturer: "Nearly all my men were on piece

work, and I allowed them to make good wages, and

never cut until the pay became absurdly high as they

got more expert. I kept no books. I had two hooks.

All the bills and accounts I owed I jabbed on one

hook; and memoranda of all owed to myself I put

on the other. When some of the bills fell due, and

I couldn't deliver tickers to get a supply of money, I

gave a note. When the notes were due, a messenger

came around from the bank with the note and a

protest pinned to it for $1.25. Then I would go to

New York and get an advance, or pay the note if I

had the money. This method of giving notes for

my accounts and having all notes protested I kept

up over two years, yet my credit was fine. Every

store I traded with was always glad to furnish goods,

perhaps in amazed admiration of my system of doing

business, which was certainly new." After a while

Edison got a bookkeeper, whose vagaries made him

look back with regret on the earlier, primitive method.

"The first three months I had him go over the books

to find out how much we had made. He reported

$3000. I gave a supper to some of my men to celebrate

this, only to be told two days afterward that

he had made a mistake, and that we had lost $500; and

then a few days after that he came to me again and

said he was all mixed up, and now found that we had

made over $7000." Edison changed bookkeepers, but

never thereafter counted anything real profit until he

had paid all his debts and had the profits in the bank.



The factory work at this time related chiefly to

stock tickers, principally the "Universal," of which

at one time twelve hundred were in use. Edison's

connection with this particular device was very

close while it lasted. In a review of the ticker art,

Mr. Callahan stated, with rather grudging praise,

that "a ticker at the present time (1901) would be

considered as impracticable and unsalable if it were

not provided with a unison device," and he goes on

to remark: "The first unison on stock tickers was

one used on the Laws printer.[2] It was a crude and

unsatisfactory piece of mechanism and necessitated

doubling of the battery in order to bring it into action.

It was short-lived. The Edison unison comprised a

lever with a free end travelling in a spiral or worm

on the type-wheel shaft until it met a pin at the end

of the worm, thus obstructing the shaft and leaving

the type-wheels at the zero-point until released by

the printing lever. This device is too well known to

require a further description. It is not applicable

to any instrument using two independently moving

type-wheels; but on nearly if not all other instruments

will be found in use." The stock ticker has

enjoyed the devotion of many brilliant inventors--

G. M. Phelps, H. Van Hoevenbergh, A. A. Knudson,

G. B. Scott, S. D. Field, John Burry--and remains in

extensive use as an appliance for which no substitute

or competitor has been found. In New York the

two great stock exchanges have deemed it necessary

to own and operate a stock-ticker service for the sole

benefit of their members; and down to the present

moment the process of improvement has gone on,

impelled by the increasing volume of business to be

reported. It is significant of Edison's work, now

dimmed and overlaid by later advances, that at the

very outset he recognized the vital importance of

interchangeability in the construction of this delicate

and sensitive apparatus. But the difficulties of these

early days were almost insurmountable. Mr. R. W.

Pope says of the "Universal" machines that they were

simple and substantial and generally satisfactory,

but adds: "These instruments were supposed to have

been made with interchangeable parts; but as a

matter of fact the instances in which these parts

would fit were very few. The instruction-book prepared

for the use of inspectors stated that `The parts

should not be tinkered nor bent, as they are accurately

made and interchangeable.' The difficulties encountered

in fitting them properly doubtless gave rise to a

story that Mr. Edison had stated that there were three

degrees of interchangeability. This was interpreted to

mean: First, the parts will fit; second, they will almost

fit; third, they do not fit, and can't be made to fit."





[2] This I invented as well.--T. A. E.





This early shop affords an illustration of the manner

in which Edison has made a deep impression on the

personnel of the electrical arts. At a single bench

there worked three men since rich or prominent.

One was Sigmund Bergmann, for a time partner with

Edison in his lighting developments in the United

States, and now head and principal owner of electrical

works in Berlin employing ten thousand men. The

next man adjacent was John Kruesi, afterward engineer

of the great General Electric Works at

Schenectady. A third was Schuckert, who left the

bench to settle up his father's little estate at Nuremberg,

stayed there and founded electrical factories,

which became the third largest in Germany, their

proprietor dying very wealthy. "I gave them a good

training as to working hours and hustling," says their

quondam master; and this is equally true as applied

to many scores of others working in companies bearing

the Edison name or organized under Edison

patents. It is curiously significant in this connection

that of the twenty-one presidents of the national

society, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers,

founded in 1884, eight have been intimately

associated with Edison--namely, Norvin Green and

F. L. Pope, as business colleagues of the days of which

we now write; while Messrs. Frank J. Sprague, T. C.

Martin, A. E. Kennelly, S. S. Wheeler, John W.

Lieb, Jr., and Louis A. Ferguson have all been at one

time or another in the Edison employ. The remark

was once made that if a famous American teacher

sat at one end of a log and a student at the other end,

the elements of a successful university were present.

It is equally true that in Edison and the many men

who have graduated from his stern school of endeavor,

America has had its foremost seat of electrical

engineering.


