





CHAPTER III



BOYHOOD AT PORT HURON, MICHIGAN



THE new home found by the Edison family at

Port Huron, where Alva spent his brief boyhood

before he became a telegraph operator and roamed

the whole middle West of that period, was unfortunately

destroyed by fire just after the close of the

Civil War. A smaller but perhaps more comfortable

home was then built by Edison's father on some

property he had bought at the near-by village of

Gratiot, and there his mother spent the remainder

of her life in confirmed invalidism, dying in 1871.

Hence the pictures and postal cards sold largely to

souvenir-hunters as the Port Huron home do not

actually show that in or around which the events

now referred to took place.



It has been a romance of popular biographers, based

upon the fact that Edison began his career as a

newsboy, to assume that these earlier years were

spent in poverty and privation, as indeed they usually

are by the "newsies" who swarm and shout their

papers in our large cities. While it seems a pity to

destroy this erroneous idea, suggestive of a heroic

climb from the depths to the heights, nothing could

be further from the truth. Socially the Edison family

stood high in Port Huron at a time when there

was relatively more wealth and general activity than

to-day. The town in its pristine prime was a great

lumber centre, and hummed with the industry of

numerous sawmills. An incredible quantity of lumber

was made there yearly until the forests near-by

vanished and the industry with them. The wealth

of the community, invested largely in this business

and in allied transportation companies, was accumulated

rapidly and as freely spent during those days

of prosperity in St. Clair County, bringing with it a

high standard of domestic comfort. In all this the

Edisons shared on equal terms.



Thus, contrary to the stories that have been so

widely published, the Edisons, while not rich by any

means, were in comfortable circumstances, with a

well-stocked farm and large orchard to draw upon

also for sustenance. Samuel Edison, on moving to

Port Huron, became a dealer in grain and feed, and

gave attention to that business for many years. But

he was also active in the lumber industry in the

Saginaw district and several other things. It was

difficult for a man of such mercurial, restless

temperament to stay constant to any one occupation;

in fact, had he been less visionary he would have

been more prosperous, but might not have had a son

so gifted with insight and imagination. One instance

of the optimistic vagaries which led him incessantly

to spend time and money on projects that would not

have appealed to a man less sanguine was the

construction on his property of a wooden observation

tower over a hundred feet high, the top of which was

reached toilsomely by winding stairs, after the pay-



ment of twenty-five cents. It is true that the tower

commanded a pretty view by land and water, but

Colonel Sellers himself might have projected this

enterprise as a possible source of steady income. At

first few visitors panted up the long flights of steps

to the breezy platform. During the first two months

Edison's father took in three dollars, and felt extremely

blue over the prospect, and to young Edison and his

relatives were left the lonely pleasures of the lookout

and the enjoyment of the telescope with which it

was equipped. But one fine day there came an excursion

from an inland town to see the lake. They

picnicked in the grove, and six hundred of them went

up the tower. After that the railroad company began

to advertise these excursions, and the receipts

each year paid for the observatory.



It might be thought that, immersed in business

and preoccupied with schemes of this character, Mr.

Edison was to blame for the neglect of his son's

education. But that was not the case. The conditions

were peculiar. It was at the Port Huron public

school that Edison received all the regular scholastic

instruction he ever enjoyed--just three months.

He might have spent the full term there, but, as

already noted, his teacher had found him "addled."

He was always, according to his own recollection,

at the foot of the class, and had come almost to regard

himself as a dunce, while his father entertained

vague anxieties as to his stupidity. The truth of the

matter seems to be that Mrs. Edison, a teacher of uncommon

ability and force, held no very high opinion

of the average public-school methods and results, and

was both eager to undertake the instruction of her

son and ambitious for the future of a boy whom she

knew from pedagogic experience to be receptive and

thoughtful to a very unusual degree. With her he

found study easy and pleasant. The quality of culture

in that simple but refined home, as well as the

intellectual character of this youth without schooling,

may be inferred from the fact that before he

had reached the age of twelve he had read, with his

mother's help, Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman

Empire, Hume's History of England, Sears' History of

the World, Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, and the

Dictionary of Sciences; and had even attempted to

struggle through Newton's Principia, whose mathematics

were decidedly beyond both teacher and

student. Besides, Edison, like Faraday, was never

a mathematician, and has had little personal use for

arithmetic beyond that which is called "mental."

He said once to a friend: "I can always hire some

mathematicians, but they can't hire me." His father,

by-the-way, always encouraged these literary tastes,

and paid him a small sum for each new book mastered.

It will be noted that fiction makes no showing

in the list; but it was not altogether excluded

from the home library, and Edison has all his life

enjoyed it, particularly the works of such writers as

Victor Hugo, after whom, because of his enthusiastic

admiration--possibly also because of his imagination--he

was nicknamed by his fellow-operators,

"Victor Hugo Edison."



Electricity at that moment could have no allure

for a youthful mind. Crude telegraphy represented

what was known of it practically, and about that the

books read by young Edison were not redundantly

informational. Even had that not been so, the

inclinations of the boy barely ten years old were

toward chemistry, and fifty years later there is seen

no change of predilection. It sounds like heresy to

say that Edison became an electrician by chance,

but it is the sober fact that to this pre-eminent and

brilliant leader in electrical achievement escape into

the chemical domain still has the aspect of a delightful

truant holiday. One of the earliest stories about

his boyhood relates to the incident when he induced

a lad employed in the family to swallow a large

quantity of Seidlitz powders in the belief that the

gases generated would enable him to fly. The agonies

of the victim attracted attention, and Edison's

mother marked her displeasure by an application of

the switch kept behind the old Seth Thomas "grandfather

clock." The disastrous result of this experiment

did not discourage Edison at all, as he attributed

failure to the lad rather than to the motive

power. In the cellar of the Edison homestead young

Alva soon accumulated a chemical outfit, constituting

the first in a long series of laboratories. The word

"laboratory" had always been associated with

alchemists in the past, but as with "filament" this

untutored stripling applied an iconoclastic practicability

to it long before he realized the significance of

the new departure. Goethe, in his legend of Faust,

shows the traditional or conventional philosopher in

his laboratory, an aged, tottering, gray-bearded

investigator, who only becomes youthful upon dia-

bolical intervention, and would stay senile without

it. In the Edison laboratory no such weird transformation

has been necessary, for the philosopher had

youth, fiery energy, and a grimly practical determination

that would submit to no denial of the goal

of something of real benefit to mankind. Edison and

Faust are indeed the extremes of philosophic thought

and accomplishment.



The home at Port Huron thus saw the first Edison

laboratory. The boy began experimenting when he

was about ten or eleven years of age. He got a copy

of Parker's School Philosophy, an elementary book on

physics, and about every experiment in it he tried.

Young Alva, or "Al," as he was called, thus early

displayed his great passion for chemistry, and in the

cellar of the house he collected no fewer than two

hundred bottles, gleaned in baskets from all parts of

the town. These were arranged carefully on shelves

and all labelled "Poison," so that no one else would

handle or disturb them. They contained the chemicals

with which he was constantly experimenting.

To others this diversion was both mysterious and

meaningless, but he had soon become familiar with

all the chemicals obtainable at the local drug stores,

and had tested to his satisfaction many of the statements

encountered in his scientific reading. Edison

has said that sometimes he has wondered how it was

he did not become an analytical chemist instead of

concentrating on electricity, for which he had at first

no great inclination.



Deprived of the use of a large part of her cellar,

tiring of the "mess" always to be found there, and

somewhat fearful of results, his mother once told the

boy to clear everything out and restore order. The

thought of losing all his possessions was the cause

of so much ardent distress that his mother relented,

but insisted that he must get a lock and key, and

keep the embryonic laboratory closed up all the time

except when he was there. This was done. From

such work came an early familiarity with the nature

of electrical batteries and the production of current

from them. Apparently the greater part of his spare

time was spent in the cellar, for he did not share to

any extent in the sports of the boys of the

neighborhood, his chum and chief companion, Michael

Oates, being a lad of Dutch origin, many years older,

who did chores around the house, and who could be

recruited as a general utility Friday for the experiments

of this young explorer--such as that with the

Seidlitz powders.



Such pursuits as these consumed the scant pocket-

money of the boy very rapidly. He was not in regular

attendance at school, and had read all the books

within reach. It was thus he turned newsboy, overcoming

the reluctance of his parents, particularly

that of his mother, by pointing out that he could by

this means earn all he wanted for his experiments

and get fresh reading in the shape of papers and

magazines free of charge. Besides, his leisure hours

in Detroit he would be able to spend at the public

library. He applied (in 1859) for the privilege of

selling newspapers on the trains of the Grand Trunk

Railroad, between Port Huron and Detroit, and obtained

the concession after a short delay, during

which he made an essay in his task of selling newspapers.



Edison had, as a fact, already had some commercial

experience from the age of eleven. The ten acres of

the reservation offered an excellent opportunity for

truck-farming, and the versatile head of the family

could not avoid trying his luck in this branch of

work. A large "market garden" was laid out, in

which Edison worked pretty steadily with the help of

the Dutch boy, Michael Oates--he of the flying

experiment. These boys had a horse and small wagon

intrusted to them, and every morning in the season

they would load up with onions, lettuce, peas, etc.,

and go through the town.



As much as $600 was turned over to Mrs. Edison

in one year from this source. The boy was indefatigable

but not altogether charmed with agriculture.

"After a while I tired of this work, as hoeing

corn in a hot sun is unattractive, and I did not

wonder that it had built up cities. Soon the Grand

Trunk Railroad was extended from Toronto to Port

Huron, at the foot of Lake Huron, and thence to

Detroit, at about the same time the War of the

Rebellion broke out. By a great amount of persistence

I got permission from my mother to go on the

local train as a newsboy. The local train from Port

Huron to Detroit, a distance of sixty-three miles,

left at 7 A.M. and arrived again at 9.30 P.M. After

being on the train for several months, I started two

stores in Port Huron--one for periodicals, and the

other for vegetables, butter, and berries in the season.

These were attended by two boys who shared in the

profits. The periodical store I soon closed, as the

boy in charge could not be trusted. The vegetable

store I kept up for nearly a year. After the railroad

had been opened a short time, they put on an express

which left Detroit in the morning and returned in

the evening. I received permission to put a newsboy

on this train. Connected with this train was

a car, one part for baggage and the other part for

U. S. mail, but for a long time it was not used. Every

morning I had two large baskets of vegetables from

the Detroit market loaded in the mail-car and sent

to Port Huron, where the boy would take them to

the store. They were much better than those grown

locally, and sold readily. I never was asked to pay

freight, and to this day cannot explain why, except

that I was so small and industrious, and the nerve to

appropriate a U. S. mail-car to do a free freight business

was so monumental. However, I kept this up

for a long time, and in addition bought butter from

the farmers along the line, and an immense amount

of blackberries in the season. I bought wholesale

and at a low price, and permitted the wives of the

engineers and trainmen to have the benefit of the

discount. After a while there was a daily immigrant

train put on. This train generally had from seven

to ten coaches filled always with Norwegians, all

bound for Iowa and Minnesota. On these trains I

employed a boy who sold bread, tobacco, and stick

candy. As the war progressed the daily newspaper

sales became very profitable, and I gave up the vegetable

store."



The hours of this occupation were long, but the

work was not particularly heavy, and Edison soon

found opportunity for his favorite avocation--chemical

experimentation. His train left Port Huron at

7 A.M., and made its southward trip to Detroit in

about three hours. This gave a stay in that city

from 10 A.M. until the late afternoon, when the train

left, arriving at Port Huron about 9.30 P.M. The

train was made up of three coaches--baggage, smoking,

and ordinary passenger or "ladies." The baggage-car

was divided into three compartments--one

for trunks and packages, one for the mail, and one for

smoking. In those days no use was made of the

smoking-compartment, as there was no ventilation,

and it was turned over to young Edison, who not only

kept papers there and his stock of goods as a "candy

butcher," but soon had it equipped with an extraordinary

variety of apparatus. There was plenty of

leisure on the two daily runs, even for an industrious

boy, and thus he found time to transfer his laboratory

from the cellar and re-establish it on the train.



His earnings were also excellent--so good, in fact,

that eight or ten dollars a day were often taken in,

and one dollar went every day to his mother. Thus

supporting himself, he felt entitled to spend any other

profit left over on chemicals and apparatus. And

spent it was, for with access to Detroit and its large

stores, where he bought his supplies, and to the public

library, where he could quench his thirst for technical

information, Edison gave up all his spare time

and money to chemistry. Surely the country could

have presented at that moment no more striking example

of the passionate pursuit of knowledge under

difficulties than this newsboy, barely fourteen years

of age, with his jars and test-tubes installed on a

railway baggage-car.



Nor did this amazing equipment stop at batteries

and bottles. The same little space a few feet square

was soon converted by this precocious youth into a

newspaper office. The outbreak of the Civil War

gave a great stimulus to the demand for all newspapers,

noticing which he became ambitious to publish

a local journal of his own, devoted to the news

of that section of the Grand Trunk road. A small

printing-press that had been used for hotel bills of

fare was picked up in Detroit, and type was also

bought, some of it being placed on the train so that

composition could go on in spells of leisure. To one

so mechanical in his tastes as Edison, it was quite

easy to learn the rudiments of the printing art, and

thus the Weekly Herald came into existence, of which

he was compositor, pressman, editor, publisher, and

newsdealer. Only one or two copies of this journal

are now discoverable, but its appearance can be

judged from the reduced facsimile here shown. The

thing was indeed well done as the work of a youth

shown by the date to be less than fifteen years old.

The literary style is good, there are only a few trivial

slips in spelling, and the appreciation is keen of what

would be interesting news and gossip. The price was

three cents a copy, or eight cents a month for regular

subscribers, and the circulation ran up to over

four hundred copies an issue. This was by no means

the result of mere public curiosity, but attested the

value of the sheet as a genuine newspaper, to which

many persons in the railroad service along the line

were willing contributors. Indeed, with the aid of

the railway telegraph, Edison was often able to print

late news of importance, of local origin, that the distant

regular papers like those of Detroit, which he

handled as a newsboy, could not get. It is no wonder

that this clever little sheet received the approval

and patronage of the English engineer Stephenson

when inspecting the Grand Trunk system, and was

noted by no less distinguished a contemporary than

the London Times as the first newspaper in the world

to be printed on a train in motion. The youthful

proprietor sometimes cleared as much as twenty to

thirty dollars a month from this unique journalistic

enterprise.



But all this extra work required attention, and

Edison solved the difficulty of attending also to the

newsboy business by the employment of a young

friend, whom he trained and treated liberally as an

understudy. There was often plenty of work for

both in the early days of the war, when the news of

battle caused intense excitement and large sales of

papers. Edison, with native shrewdness already so

strikingly displayed, would telegraph the station

agents and get them to bulletin the event of the day

at the front, so that when each station was reached

there were eager purchasers waiting. He recalls in

particular the sensation caused by the great battle

of Shiloh, or Pittsburg Landing, in April, 1862, in

which both Grant and Sherman were engaged, in

which Johnston died, and in which there was a ghastly

total of 25,000 killed and wounded.



In describing his enterprising action that day, Edison

says that when he reached Detroit the bulletin-

boards of the newspaper offices were surrounded with

dense crowds, which read awestricken the news that

there were 60,000 killed and wounded, and that the

result was uncertain. "I knew that if the same

excitement was attained at the various small towns

along the road, and especially at Port Huron, the sale

of papers would be great. I then conceived the idea

of telegraphing the news ahead, went to the operator

in the depot, and by giving him Harper's Weekly and

some other papers for three months, he agreed to

telegraph to all the stations the matter on the bulletin-board.

I hurriedly copied it, and he sent it, requesting

the agents to display it on the blackboards

used for stating the arrival and departure of trains. I

decided that instead of the usual one hundred papers

I could sell one thousand; but not having sufficient

money to purchase that number, I determined in my

desperation to see the editor himself and get credit.

The great paper at that time was the Detroit Free

Press. I walked into the office marked "Editorial"

and told a young man that I wanted to see the editor

on important business--important to me, anyway,

I was taken into an office where there were two men,

and I stated what I had done about telegraphing,

and that I wanted a thousand papers, but only had

money for three hundred, and I wanted credit. One

of the men refused it, but the other told the first

spokesman to let me have them. This man, I afterward

learned, was Wilbur F. Storey, who subsequently

founded the Chicago Times, and became celebrated in

the newspaper world. By the aid of another boy I

lugged the papers to the train and started folding

them. The first station, called Utica, was a small

one where I generally sold two papers. I saw a

crowd ahead on the platform, and thought it some

excursion, but the moment I landed there was a rush

for me; then I realized that the telegraph was a great

invention. I sold thirty-five papers there. The next

station was Mount Clemens, now a watering-place,

but then a town of about one thousand. I usually

sold six to eight papers there. I decided that if I

found a corresponding crowd there, the only thing

to do to correct my lack of judgment in not getting

more papers was to raise the price from five cents to

ten. The crowd was there, and I raised the price. At

the various towns there were corresponding crowds.

It had been my practice at Port Huron to jump from

the train at a point about one-fourth of a mile from

the station, where the train generally slackened

speed. I had drawn several loads of sand to this

point to jump on, and had become quite expert. The

little Dutch boy with the horse met me at this point.

When the wagon approached the outskirts of the

town I was met by a large crowd. I then yelled:

`Twenty-five cents apiece, gentlemen! I haven't

enough to go around!' I sold all out, and made what

to me then was an immense sum of money."



Such episodes as this added materially to his income,

but did not necessarily increase his savings,

for he was then, as now, an utter spendthrift so long

as some new apparatus or supplies for experiment

could be had. In fact, the laboratory on wheels soon

became crowded with such equipment, most costly

chemicals were bought on the instalment plan, and

Fresenius' Qualitative Analysis served as a basis for

ceaseless testing and study. George Pullman, who

then had a small shop at Detroit and was working

on his sleeping-car, made Edison a lot of wooden

apparatus for his chemicals, to the boy's delight.

Unfortunately a sudden change came, fraught with

disaster. The train, running one day at thirty miles

an hour over a piece of poorly laid track, was thrown

suddenly out of the perpendicular with a violent

lurch, and, before Edison could catch it, a stick of

phosphorus was jarred from its shelf, fell to the

floor, and burst into flame. The car took fire, and

the boy, in dismay, was still trying to quench the

blaze when the conductor, a quick-tempered Scotchman,

who acted also as baggage-master, hastened to

the scene with water and saved his car. On the arrival

at Mount Clemens station, its next stop, Edison

and his entire outfit, laboratory, printing-plant, and

all, were promptly ejected by the enraged conductor,

and the train then moved off, leaving him on the platform,

tearful and indignant in the midst of his beloved

but ruined possessions. It was lynch law of a

kind; but in view of the responsibility, this action of

the conductor lay well within his rights and duties.



It was through this incident that Edison acquired

the deafness that has persisted all through his life,

a severe box on the ears from the scorched and angry

conductor being the direct cause of the infirmity.

Although this deafness would be regarded as a great

affliction by most people, and has brought in its train

other serious baubles, Mr. Edison has always regarded

it philosophically, and said about it recently:

"This deafness has been of great advantage to me

in various ways. When in a telegraph office, I could

only hear the instrument directly on the table at

which I sat, and unlike the other operators, I was not

bothered by the other instruments. Again, in

experimenting on the telephone, I had to improve the

transmitter so I could hear it. This made the telephone

commercial, as the magneto telephone receiver

of Bell was too weak to be used as a transmitter

commercially. It was the same with the phonograph.

The great defect of that instrument was the

rendering of the overtones in music, and the hissing

consonants in speech. I worked over one year,

twenty hours a day' Sundays and all, to get the word

`specie ' perfectly recorded and reproduced on the

phonograph. When this was done I knew that

everything else could be done which was a fact.

Again, my nerves have been preserved intact. Broadway

is as quiet to me as a country village is to a

person with normal hearing."



Saddened but not wholly discouraged, Edison soon

reconstituted his laboratory and printing-office at

home, although on the part of the family there was

some fear and objection after this episode, on the score

of fire. But Edison promised not to bring in anything

of a dangerous nature. He did not cease the

publication of the Weekly Herald. On the contrary,

he prospered in both his enterprises until persuaded

by the "printer's devil" in the office of the

Port Huron Commercial to change the character of

 his journal, enlarge it, and issue it under the name

of Paul Pry, a happy designation for this or kindred

ventures in the domain of society journalism. No

copies of Paul Pry can now be found, but it is

known that its style was distinctly personal, that

gossip was its specialty, and that no small offence

was given to the people whose peculiarities or peccadilloes

were discussed in a frank and breezy style by

the two boys. In one instance the resentment of

the victim of such unsought publicity was so intense

he laid hands on Edison and pitched the startled

young editor into the St. Clair River. The name of

this violator of the freedom of the press was thereafter

excluded studiously from the columns of Paul

Pry, and the incident may have been one of those

which soon caused the abandonment of the paper.

Edison had great zest in this work, and but for the

strong influences in other directions would probably

have continued in the newspaper field, in which he

was, beyond question, the youngest publisher and

editor of the day.



Before leaving this period of his career, it is to be

noted that it gave Edison many favorable opportunities.

In Detroit he could spend frequent hours

in the public library, and it is matter of record that

he began his liberal acquaintance with its contents

by grappling bravely with a certain section and trying

to read it through consecutively, shelf by shelf,

regardless of subject. In a way this is curiously

suggestive of the earnest, energetic method of "frontal

attack" with which the inventor has since addressed

himself to so many problems in the arts and sciences.



The Grand Trunk Railroad machine-shops at Port

Huron were a great attraction to the boy, who appears

to have spent a good deal of his time there. He who

was to have much to do with the evolution of the

modern electric locomotive was fascinated by the

mechanism of the steam locomotive; and whenever

he could get the chance Edison rode in the cab with

the engineer of his train. He became thoroughly

familiar with the intricacies of fire-box, boiler, valves,

levers, and gears, and liked nothing better than to

handle the locomotive himself during the run. On

one trip, when the engineer lay asleep while his eager

substitute piloted the train, the boiler "primed,"

and a deluge overwhelmed the young driver, who

stuck to his post till the run and the ordeal were

ended. Possibly this helped to spoil a locomotive

engineer, but went to make a great master of the new

motive power. "Steam is half an Englishman," said

Emerson. The temptation is strong to say that workaday

electricity is half an American. Edison's own

account of the incident is very laughable: "The engine

was one of a number leased to the Grand Trunk by

the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy. It had bright brass

bands all over, the woodwork beautifully painted,

and everything highly polished, which was the custom

up to the time old Commodore Vanderbilt

stopped it on his roads. After running about fifteen

miles the fireman couldn't keep his eyes open (this

event followed an all-night dance of the trainmen's

fraternal organization), and he agreed to permit me

to run the engine. I took charge, reducing the speed

to about twelve miles an hour, and brought the

train of seven cars to her destination at the Grand

Trunk junction safely. But something occurred which

was very much out of the ordinary. I was very much

worried about the water, and I knew that if it got

low the boiler was likely to explode. I hadn't gone

twenty miles before black damp mud blew out of the

stack and covered every part of the engine, including

myself. I was about to awaken the fireman to find

out the cause of this when it stopped. Then I approached

a station where the fireman always went out

to the cowcatcher, opened the oil-cup on the steam-

chest, and poured oil in. I started to carry out the

procedure when, upon opening the oil-cup, the steam

rushed out with a tremendous noise, nearly knocking

me off the engine. I succeeded in closing the oil-cup

and got back in the cab, and made up my mind that

she would pull through without oil. I learned afterward

that the engineer always shut off steam when

the fireman went out to oil. This point I failed to

notice. My powers of observation were very much improved

after this occurrence. Just before I reached

the junction another outpour of black mud occurred,

and the whole engine was a sight--so much so that

when I pulled into the yard everybody turned to see

it, laughing immoderately. I found the reason of the

mud was that I carried so much water it passed over

into the stack, and this washed out all the accumulated

soot."



One afternoon about a week before Christmas Edison's

train jumped the track near Utica, a station

on the line. Four old Michigan Central cars with

rotten sills collapsed in the ditch and went all to

pieces, distributing figs, raisins, dates, and candies

all over the track and the vicinity. Hating to see so

much waste, Edison tried to save all he could by eating

it on the spot, but as a result "our family doctor had

the time of his life with me in this connection."



An absurd incident described by Edison throws a

vivid light on the free-and-easy condition of early railroad

travel and on the Southern extravagance of the

time. "In 1860, just before the war broke out there

came to the train one afternoon, in Detroit, two fine-

looking young men accompanied by a colored servant.

They bought tickets for Port Huron, the terminal point

for the train. After leaving the junction just outside

of Detroit, I brought in the evening papers. When I

came opposite the two young men, one of them said:

`Boy, what have you got?' I said: `Papers.' `All

right.' He took them and threw them out of the

window, and, turning to the colored man, said:

`Nicodemus, pay this boy.' I told Nicodemus the

amount, and he opened a satchel and paid me. The

passengers didn't know what to make of the transaction.

I returned with the illustrated papers and

magazines. These were seized and thrown out of

the window, and I was told to get my money of

Nicodemus. I then returned with all the old magazines

and novels I had not been able to sell, thinking

perhaps this would be too much for them. I was

small and thin, and the layer reached above my head,

and was all I could possibly carry. I had prepared a

list, and knew the amount in case they bit again.

When I opened the door, all the passengers roared

with laughter. I walked right up to the young men.

One asked me what I had. I said `Magazines and

novels.' He promptly threw them out of the window,

and Nicodemus settled. Then I came in with

cracked hickory nuts, then pop-corn balls, and, finally,

molasses candy. All went out of the window. I felt

like Alexander the Great!--I had no more chance! I

had sold all I had. Finally I put a rope to my trunk,

which was about the size of a carpenter's chest, and

started to pull this from the baggage-car to the

passenger-car. It was almost too much for my

strength, but at last I got it in front of those men.

I pulled off my coat, shoes, and hat, and laid them

on the chest. Then he asked: `What have you got,

boy?' I said: `Everything, sir, that I can spare that is

for sale.' The passengers fairly jumped with laughter.

Nicodemus paid me $27 for this last sale, and threw

the whole out of the door in the rear of the car. These

men were from the South, and I have always retained

a soft spot in my heart for a Southern gentleman."



While Edison was a newsboy on the train a request

came to him one day to go to the office of E. B. Ward

& Company, at that time the largest owners of steamboats

on the Great Lakes. The captain of their largest

boat had died suddenly, and they wanted a message

taken to another captain who lived about fourteen

miles from Ridgeway station on the railroad. This

captain had retired, taken up some lumber land, and

had cleared part of it. Edison was offered $15 by

Mr. Ward to go and fetch him, but as it was a wild

country and would be dark, Edison stood out for

$25, so that he could get the companionship of another

lad. The terms were agreed to. Edison arrived

at Ridgeway at 8.30 P.M., when it was raining and as

dark as ink. Getting another boy with difficulty to

volunteer, he launched out on his errand in the pitch-

black night. The two boys carried lanterns, but the

road was a rough path through dense forest. The

country was wild, and it was a usual occurrence to

see deer, bear, and coon skins nailed up on the sides

of houses to dry. Edison had read about bears, but

couldn't remember whether they were day or night

prowlers. The farther they went the more apprehensive

they became, and every stump in the ravished

forest looked like a bear. The other lad proposed

seeking safety up a tree, but Edison demurred on

the plea that bears could climb, and that the message

must be delivered that night to enable the captain to

catch the morning train. First one lantern went

out, then the other. "We leaned up against a tree

and cried. I thought if I ever got out of that scrape

alive I would know more about the habits of animals

and everything else, and be prepared for all kinds of

mischance when I undertook an enterprise. However,

the intense darkness dilated the pupils of our

eyes so as to make them very sensitive, and we could

just see at times the outlines of the road. Finally,

just as a faint gleam of daylight arrived, we entered

the captain's yard and delivered the message. In

my whole life I never spent such a night of horror

as this, but I got a good lesson."



An amusing incident of this period is told by Edison.

"When I was a boy," he says, "the Prince of Wales,

the late King Edward, came to Canada (1860). Great

preparations were made at Sarnia, the Canadian town

opposite Port Huron. About every boy, including myself,

went over to see the affair. The town was draped

in flags most profusely, and carpets were laid on the

cross-walks for the prince to walk on. There were

arches, etc. A stand was built raised above the general

level, where the prince was to be received by the

mayor. Seeing all these preparations, my idea of

a prince was very high; but when he did arrive I

mistook the Duke of Newcastle for him, the duke

being a fine-looking man. I soon saw that I was mistaken:

that the prince was a young stripling, and did

not meet expectations. Several of us expressed our

belief that a prince wasn't much, after all, and said

that we were thoroughly disappointed. For this one

boy was whipped. Soon the Canuck boys attacked

the Yankee boys, and we were all badly licked. I,

myself, got a black eye. That has always prejudiced

me against that kind of ceremonial and folly." It is

certainly interesting to note that in later years the

prince for whom Edison endured the ignominy of a

black eye made generous compensation in a graceful

letter accompanying the gold Albert Medal awarded

by the Royal Society of Arts.



Another incident of the period is as follows: "After

selling papers in Port Huron, which was often not

reached until about 9.30 at night, I seldom got home

before 11.00 or 11.30. About half-way home from the

station and the town, and within twenty-five feet of

the road in a dense wood, was a soldiers' graveyard

where three hundred soldiers were buried, due to a

cholera epidemic which took place at Fort Gratiot,

near by, many years previously. At first we used

to shut our eyes and run the horse past this graveyard,

and if the horse stepped on a twig my heart

would give a violent movement, and it is a wonder

that I haven't some valvular disease of that organ.

But soon this running of the horse became monotonous,

and after a while all fears of graveyards absolutely

disappeared from my system. I was in the

condition of Sam Houston, the pioneer and founder

of Texas, who, it was said, knew no fear. Houston

lived some distance from the town and generally went

home late at night, having to pass through a dark

cypress swamp over a corduroy road. One night, to

test his alleged fearlessness, a man stationed himself

behind a tree and enveloped himself in a sheet. He

confronted Houston suddenly, and Sam stopped and

said: `If you are a man, you can't hurt me. If you

are a ghost, you don't want to hurt me. And if you are

the devil, come home with me; I married your sister!' "



It is not to be inferred, however, from some of

the preceding statements that the boy was of an

exclusively studious bent of mind. He had then, as

now, the keen enjoyment of a joke, and no particular

aversion to the practical form. An incident of the

time is in point. "After the breaking out of the war

there was a regiment of volunteer soldiers quartered at

Fort Gratiot, the reservation extending to the boundary

line of our house. Nearly every night we would

hear a call, such as `Corporal of the Guard, No. 1.'

This would be repeated from sentry to sentry until

it reached the barracks, when Corporal of the Guard,

No. 1, would come and see what was wanted. I and

the little Dutch boy, after returning from the town

after selling our papers, thought we would take a

hand at military affairs. So one night, when it was

very dark, I shouted for Corporal of the Guard, No. 1.

The second sentry, thinking it was the terminal

sentry who shouted, repeated it to the third, and so

on. This brought the corporal along the half mile,

only to find that he was fooled. We tried him three

nights; but the third night they were watching, and

caught the little Dutch boy, took him to the lock-up

at the fort, and shut him up. They chased me to

the house. I rushed for the cellar. In one small

apartment there were two barrels of potatoes and a

third one nearly empty. I poured these remnants

into the other barrels, sat down, and pulled the barrel

over my head, bottom up. The soldiers had awakened

my father, and they were searching for me with

candles and lanterns. The corporal was absolutely

certain I came into the cellar, and couldn't see how I

could have gotten out, and wanted to know from

my father if there was no secret hiding-place. On

assurance of my father, who said that there was not,

he said it was most extraordinary. I was glad when

they left, as I was cramped, and the potatoes were

rotten that had been in the barrel and violently

offensive. The next morning I was found in bed,

and received a good switching on the legs from my

father, the first and only one I ever received from

him, although my mother kept a switch behind the

old Seth Thomas clock that had the bark worn off.

My mother's ideas and mine differed at times,

especially when I got experimenting and mussed up

things. The Dutch boy was released next morning."


