





CHAPTER II



EDISON'S PEDIGREE



THOMAS ALVA EDISON was born at Milan

Ohio, February 11, 1847. The State that rivals

Virginia as a "Mother of Presidents" has evidently

other titles to distinction of the same nature. For

picturesque detail it would not be easy to find any

story excelling that of the Edison family before it

reached the Western Reserve. The story epitomizes

American idealism, restlessness, freedom of individual

opinion, and ready adjustment to the surrounding

conditions of pioneer life. The ancestral Edisons

who came over from Holland, as nearly as can be

determined, in 1730, were descendants of extensive

millers on the Zuyder Zee, and took up patents

of land along the Passaic River, New Jersey,

close to the home that Mr. Edison established in

the Orange Mountains a hundred and sixty years

later. They landed at Elizabethport, New Jersey,

and first settled near Caldwell in that State, where

some graves of the family may still be found. President

Cleveland was born in that quiet hamlet. It is

a curious fact that in the Edison family the

pronunciation of the name has always been with the

long "e" sound, as it would naturally be in the

Dutch language. The family prospered and must

have enjoyed public confidence, for we find the name

of Thomas Edison, as a bank official on Manhattan

Island, signed to Continental currency in 1778.

According to the family records this Edison, great-

grandfather of Thomas Alva, reached the extreme

old age of 104 years. But all was not well, and, as

has happened so often before, the politics of father

and son were violently different. The Loyalist movement

that took to Nova Scotia so many Americans

after the War of Independence carried with it John,

the son of this stalwart Continental. Thus it came

about that Samuel Edison, son of John, was born at

Digby, Nova Scotia, in 1804. Seven years later John

Edison who, as a Loyalist or United Empire emigrant,

had become entitled under the laws of Canada to a

grant of six hundred acres of land, moved westward

to take possession of this property. He made his

way through the State of New York in wagons drawn

by oxen to the remote and primitive township of

Bayfield, in Upper Canada, on Lake Huron. Although

the journey occurred in balmy June, it was necessarily

attended with difficulty and privation; but the new

home was situated in good farming country, and once

again this interesting nomadic family settled down.



John Edison moved from Bayfield to Vienna, Ontario,

on the northern bank of Lake Erie. Mr. Edison

supplies an interesting reminiscence of the old man

and his environment in those early Canadian days.

"When I was five years old I was taken by my father

and mother on a visit to Vienna. We were driven

by carriage from Milan, Ohio, to a railroad, then to a

port on Lake Erie, thence by a canal-boat in a tow

of several to Port Burwell, in Canada, across the lake,

and from there we drove to Vienna, a short distance

away. I remember my grandfather perfectly as he

appeared, at 102 years of age, when he died. In the

middle of the day he sat under a large tree in front

of the house facing a well-travelled road. His head

was covered completely with a large quantity of very

white hair, and he chewed tobacco incessantly, nodding

to friends as they passed by. He used a very

large cane, and walked from the chair to the house,

resenting any assistance. I viewed him from a distance,

and could never get very close to him. I remember

some large pipes, and especially a molasses

jug, a trunk, and several other things that came from

Holland."



John Edison was long-lived, like his father, and

reached the ripe old age of 102, leaving his son

Samuel charged with the care of the family destinies,

but with no great burden of wealth. Little is known

of the early manhood of this father of T. A. Edison

until we find him keeping a hotel at Vienna, marrying

a school-teacher there (Miss Nancy Elliott, in 1828),

and taking a lively share in the troublous politics of

the time. He was six feet in height, of great bodily

vigor, and of such personal dominance of character

that he became a captain of the insurgent forces

rallying under the banners of Papineau and Mackenzie.

The opening years of Queen Victoria's reign

witnessed a belated effort in Canada to emphasize

the principle that there should not be taxation without

representation; and this descendant of those

who had left the United States from disapproval of

such a doctrine, flung himself headlong into its

support.



It has been said of Earl Durham, who pacified

Canada at this time and established the present system

of government, that he made a country and marred

a career. But the immediate measures of repression

enforced before a liberal policy was adopted were

sharp and severe, and Samuel Edison also found his

own career marred on Canadian soil as one result of

the Durham administration. Exile to Bermuda with

other insurgents was not so attractive as the perils of

a flight to the United States. A very hurried

departure was effected in secret from the scene of

trouble, and there are romantic traditions of his

thrilling journey of one hundred and eighty-two

miles toward safety, made almost entirely without

food or sleep, through a wild country infested with

Indians of unfriendly disposition. Thus was the

Edison family repatriated by a picturesque political

episode, and the great inventor given a birthplace on

American soil, just as was Benjamin Franklin when

his father came from England to Boston. Samuel

Edison left behind him, however, in Canada, several

brothers, all of whom lived to the age of ninety or

more, and from whom there are descendants in the

region.



After some desultory wanderings for a year or two


along the shores of Lake Erie, among the prosperous

towns then springing up, the family, with its Canadian

home forfeited, and in quest of another resting-place,

came to Milan, Ohio, in 1842. That pretty little

village offered at the moment many attractions as a

possible Chicago. The railroad system of Ohio was

still in the future, but the Western Reserve had

already become a vast wheat-field, and huge quantities

of grain from the central and northern counties

sought shipment to Eastern ports. The Huron

River, emptying into Lake Erie, was navigable within

a few miles of the village, and provided an admirable

outlet. Large granaries were established, and proved

so successful that local capital was tempted into the

project of making a tow-path canal from Lockwood

Landing all the way to Milan itself. The quaint old

Moravian mission and quondam Indian settlement of

one hundred inhabitants found itself of a sudden

one of the great grain ports of the world, and bidding

fair to rival Russian Odessa. A number of grain

warehouses, or primitive elevators, were built along

the bank of the canal, and the produce of the region

poured in immediately, arriving in wagons drawn by

four or six horses with loads of a hundred bushels.

No fewer than six hundred wagons came clattering in,

and as many as twenty sail vessels were loaded with

thirty-five thousand bushels of grain, during a single

day. The canal was capable of being navigated by

craft of from two hundred to two hundred and fifty

tons burden, and the demand for such vessels soon

led to the development of a brisk ship-building industry,

for which the abundant forests of the region

supplied the necessary lumber. An evidence of the

activity in this direction is furnished by the fact

that six revenue cutters were launched at this port

in these brisk days of its prime.



Samuel Edison, versatile, buoyant of temper, and

ever optimistic, would thus appear to have pitched

his tent with shrewd judgment. There was plenty

of occupation ready to his hand, and more than one

enterprise received his attention; but he devoted

his energies chiefly to the making of shingles, for

which there was a large demand locally and along

the lake. Canadian lumber was used principally in

this industry. The wood was imported in "bolts"

or pieces three feet long. A bolt made two shingles;

it was sawn asunder by hand, then split and shaved.

None but first-class timber was used, and such shingles

outlasted far those made by machinery with their

cross-grain cut. A house in Milan, on which some

of those shingles were put in 1844, was still in excellent

condition forty-two years later. Samuel Edison

did well at this occupation, and employed several

men, but there were other outlets from time to time

for his business activity and speculative disposition.



Edison's mother was an attractive and highly

educated woman, whose influence upon his disposition

and intellect has been profound and lasting.

She was born in Chenango County, New York, in 1810,

and was the daughter of the Rev. John Elliott, a

Baptist minister and descendant of an old Revolutionary

soldier, Capt. Ebenezer Elliott, of Scotch

descent. The old captain was a fine and picturesque

type. He fought all through the long War of Independence

--seven years--and then appears to have

settled down at Stonington, Connecticut. There, at

any rate, he found his wife, "grandmother Elliott,"

who was Mercy Peckham, daughter of a Scotch

Quaker. Then came the residence in New York

State, with final removal to Vienna, for the old

soldier, while drawing his pension at Buffalo, lived

in the little Canadian town, and there died, over

100 years old. The family was evidently one of considerable

culture and deep religious feeling, for two

of Mrs. Edison's uncles and two brothers were also

in the same Baptist ministry. As a young woman

she became a teacher in the public high school at

Vienna, and thus met her husband, who was residing

there. The family never consisted of more than three

children, two boys and a girl. A trace of the Canadian

environment is seen in the fact that Edison's

elder brother was named William Pitt, after the

great English statesman. Both his brother and the

sister exhibited considerable ability. William Pitt

Edison as a youth was so clever with his pencil that

it was proposed to send him to Paris as an art student.

In later life he was manager of the local

street railway lines at Port Huron, Michigan, in

which he was heavily interested. He also owned a

good farm near that town, and during the ill-health

at the close of his life, when compelled to spend much

of the time indoors, he devoted himself almost entirely

to sketching. It has been noted by intimate

observers of Thomas A. Edison that in discussing

any project or new idea his first impulse is to take

up any piece of paper available and make drawings

of it. His voluminous note-books are a mass of

sketches. Mrs-Tannie Edison Bailey, the sister, had,

on the other hand, a great deal of literary ability,

and spent much of her time in writing.



The great inventor, whose iron endurance and

stern will have enabled him to wear down all his

associates by work sustained through arduous days

and sleepless nights, was not at all strong as a child,

and was of fragile appearance. He had an abnormally

large but well-shaped head, and it is said that

the local doctors feared he might have brain trouble.

In fact, on account of his assumed delicacy, he was

not allowed to go to school for some years, and even

when he did attend for a short time the results were

not encouraging--his mother being hotly indignant

upon hearing that the teacher had spoken of him to

an inspector as "addled." The youth was, indeed,

fortunate far beyond the ordinary in having a

mother at once loving, well-informed, and ambitious,

capable herself, from her experience as a teacher, of

undertaking and giving him an education better than

could be secured in the local schools of the day.

Certain it is that under this simple regime studious

habits were formed and a taste for literature developed

that have lasted to this day. If ever there was a

man who tore the heart out of books it is Edison,

and what has once been read by him is never forgotten

if useful or worthy of submission to the test

of experiment.



But even thus early the stronger love of mechanical

processes and of probing natural forces manifested

itself. Edison has said that he never saw a statement

in any book as to such things that he did

not involuntarily challenge, and wish to demonstrate

as either right or wrong. As a mere child the busy

scenes of the canal and the grain warehouses were of

consuming interest, but the work in the ship-building

yards had an irresistible fascination. His questions

were so ceaseless and innumerable that the penetrating

curiosity of an unusually strong mind was regarded

as deficiency in powers of comprehension, and

the father himself, a man of no mean ingenuity and

ability, reports that the child, although capable of

reducing him to exhaustion by endless inquiries, was

often spoken of as rather wanting in ordinary acumen.

This apparent dulness is, however, a quite common

incident to youthful genius.



The constructive tendencies of this child of whom

his father said once that he had never had any boyhood

days in the ordinary sense, were early noted in

his fondness for building little plank roads out of the

debris of the yards and mills. His extraordinarily

retentive memory was shown in his easy acquisition

of all the songs of the lumber gangs and canal men

before he was five years old. One incident tells how

he was found one day in the village square copying

laboriously the signs of the stores. A highly characteristic

event at the age of six is described by his

sister. He had noted a goose sitting on her eggs

and the result. One day soon after, he was missing.

By-and-by, after an anxious search, his father found

him sitting in a nest he had made in the barn, filled

with goose-eggs and hens' eggs he had collected, trying

to hatch them out.



One of Mr. Edison's most vivid recollections goes

back to 1850, when as a child three of four years old

he saw camped in front of his home six covered

wagons, "prairie schooners," and witnessed their

departure for California. The great excitement over

the gold discoveries was thus felt in Milan, and these

wagons, laden with all the worldly possessions of

their owners, were watched out of sight on their long

journey by this fascinated urchin, whose own discoveries

in later years were to tempt many other

argonauts into the auriferous realms of electricity.



Another vivid memory of this period concerns his

first realization of the grim mystery of death. He

went off one day with the son of the wealthiest man

in the town to bathe in the creek. Soon after they

entered the water the other boy disappeared. Young

Edison waited around the spot for half an hour or

more, and then, as it was growing dark, went home

puzzled and lonely, but silent as to the occurrence.

About two hours afterward, when the missing boy

was being searched for, a man came to the Edison

home to make anxious inquiry of the companion with

whom he had last been seen. Edison told all the

circumstances with a painful sense of being in some

way implicated. The creek was at once dragged, and

then the body was recovered.



Edison had himself more than one narrow escape.

Of course he fell in the canal and was nearly drowned;

few boys in Milan worth their salt omitted that

performance. On another occasion he encountered a

more novel peril by falling into the pile of wheat in

a grain elevator and being almost smothered. Holding

the end of a skate-strap for another lad to shorten

with an axe, he lost the top of a finger. Fire also

had its perils. He built a fire in a barn, but the

flames spread so rapidly that, although he escaped

himself, the barn was wholly destroyed, and he was

publicly whipped in the village square as a warning

to other youths. Equally well remembered is a dangerous

encounter with a ram that attacked him while

he was busily engaged digging out a bumblebee's

nest near an orchard fence. The animal knocked

him against the fence, and was about to butt him

again when he managed to drop over on the safe side

and escape. He was badly hurt and bruised, and no

small quantity of arnica was needed for his wounds.



Meantime little Milan had reached the zenith of

its prosperity, and all of a sudden had been deprived

of its flourishing grain trade by the new Columbus,

Sandusky & Hocking Railroad; in fact, the short

canal was one of the last efforts of its kind in this

country to compete with the new means of transportation.

The bell of the locomotive was everywhere

ringing the death-knell of effective water haulage,

with such dire results that, in 1880, of the 4468

miles of American freight canal, that had cost $214,000,000,

no fewer than 1893 miles had been abandoned,

and of the remaining 2575 miles quite a large

proportion was not paying expenses. The short

Milan canal suffered with the rest, and to-day lies

well-nigh obliterated, hidden in part by vegetable

gardens, a mere grass-grown depression at the foot

of the winding, shallow valley. Other railroads also

prevented any further competition by the canal, for

a branch of the Wheeling & Lake Erie now passes

through the village, while the Lake Shore & Michigan

Southern runs a few miles to the south.



The owners of the canal soon had occasion to

regret that they had disdained the overtures of

enterprising railroad promoters desirous of reaching

the village, and the consequences of commercial isolation

rapidly made themselves felt. It soon became

evident to Samuel Edison and his wife that the cozy

brick home on the bluff must be given up and the

struggle with fortune resumed elsewhere. They were

well-to-do, however, and removing, in 1854, to Port

Huron, Michigan, occupied a large colonial house

standing in the middle of an old Government fort

reservation of ten acres overlooking the wide expanse

of the St. Clair River just after it leaves Lake Huron.

It was in many ways an ideal homestead, toward

which the family has always felt the strongest attachment,

but the association with Milan has never

wholly ceased. The old house in which Edison was

born is still occupied (in 1910) by Mr. S. O. Edison,

a half-brother of Edison's father, and a man of marked

inventive ability. He was once prominent in the

iron-furnace industry of Ohio, and was for a time

associated in the iron trade with the father of the

late President McKinley. Among his inventions may

be mentioned a machine for making fuel from wheat

straw, and a smoke-consuming device.



This birthplace of Edison remains the plain, substantial

little brick house it was originally: one-

storied, with rooms finished on the attic floor. Being

built on the hillside, its basement opens into the rear

yard. It was at first heated by means of open coal

grates, which may not have been altogether adequate

in severe winters, owing to the altitude and the north-

eastern exposure, but a large furnace is one of the

more modern changes. Milan itself is not materially

unlike the smaller Ohio towns of its own time or

those of later creation, but the venerable appearance

of the big elm-trees that fringe the trim lawns tells

of its age. It is, indeed, an extremely neat, snug little

place, with well-kept homes, mostly of frame construction,

and flagged streets crossing each other at

right angles. There are no poor--at least, everybody

is apparently well-to-do. While a leisurely atmosphere

pervades the town, few idlers are seen. Some

of the residents are engaged in local business; some

are occupied in farming and grape culture; others are

employed in the iron-works near-by, at Norwalk.

The stores and places of public resort are gathered

about the square, where there is plenty of room for

hitching when the Saturday trading is done at that

point, at which periods the fitful bustle recalls the

old wheat days when young Edison ran with curiosity

among the six and eight horse teams that had brought

in grain. This square is still covered with fine

primeval forest trees, and has at its centre a handsome

soldiers' monument of the Civil War, to which

four paved walks converge. It is an altogether pleasant

and unpretentious town, which cherishes with no

small amount of pride its association with the name

of Thomas Alva Edison.



In view of Edison's Dutch descent, it is rather

singular to find him with the name of Alva, for the

Spanish Duke of Alva was notoriously the worst

tyrant ever known to the Low Countries, and his

evil deeds occupy many stirring pages in Motley's

famous history. As a matter of fact, Edison was

named after Capt. Alva Bradley, an old friend of his

father, and a celebrated ship-owner on the Lakes.

Captain Bradley died a few years ago in wealth, while

his old associate, with equal ability for making money,

was never able long to keep it (differing again from

the Revolutionary New York banker from whom his

son's other name, "Thomas," was taken).
