





EDISON, HIS LIFE AND INVENTIONS





CHAPTER I



THE AGE OF ELECTRICITY



THE year 1847 marked a period of great territorial

acquisition by the American people, with incalculable

additions to their actual and potential wealth.

By the rational compromise with England in the dispute

over the Oregon region, President Polk had secured

during 1846, for undisturbed settlement, three

hundred thousand square miles of forest, fertile land,

and fisheries, including the whole fair Columbia Valley.

Our active "policy of the Pacific" dated from

that hour. With swift and clinching succession came

the melodramatic Mexican War, and February, 1848,

saw another vast territory south of Oregon and west

of the Rocky Mountains added by treaty to the United

States. Thus in about eighteen months there had

been pieced into the national domain for quick development

and exploitation a region as large as the

entire Union of Thirteen States at the close of the War

of Independence. Moreover, within its boundaries

was embraced all the great American gold-field, just

on the eve of discovery, for Marshall had detected the

shining particles in the mill-race at the foot of the

Sierra Nevada nine days before Mexico signed away

her rights in California and in all the vague, remote

hinterland facing Cathayward.



Equally momentous were the times in Europe, where

the attempt to secure opportunities of expansion as

well as larger liberty for the individual took quite

different form. The old absolutist system of government

was fast breaking up, and ancient thrones were

tottering. The red lava of deep revolutionary fires

oozed up through many glowing cracks in the political

crust, and all the social strata were shaken. That the

wild outbursts of insurrection midway in the fifth

decade failed and died away was not surprising, for

the superincumbent deposits of tradition and convention

were thick. But the retrospect indicates that

many reforms and political changes were accomplished,

although the process involved the exile of not a few

ardent spirits to America, to become leading statesmen,

inventors, journalists, and financiers. In 1847,

too, Russia began her tremendous march eastward into

Central Asia, just as France was solidifying her first

gains on the littoral of northern Africa. In England

the fierce fervor of the Chartist movement, with its

violent rhetoric as to the rights of man, was sobering

down and passing pervasively into numerous practical

schemes for social and political amelioration, constituting

in their entirety a most profound change

throughout every part of the national life.



Into such times Thomas Alva Edison was born, and

his relations to them and to the events of the past

sixty years are the subject of this narrative. Aside

from the personal interest that attaches to the picturesque

career, so typically American, there is a broader

aspect in which the work of the "Franklin of the

Nineteenth Century" touches the welfare and progress

of the race. It is difficult at any time to determine

the effect of any single invention, and the investigation

becomes more difficult where inventions of the

first class have been crowded upon each other in rapid

and bewildering succession. But it will be admitted

that in Edison one deals with a central figure of the

great age that saw the invention and introduction in

practical form of the telegraph, the submarine cable,

the telephone, the electric light, the electric railway,

the electric trolley-car, the storage battery, the electric

motor, the phonograph, the wireless telegraph; and

that the influence of these on the world's affairs has

not been excelled at any time by that of any other

corresponding advances in the arts and sciences.

These pages deal with Edison's share in the great

work of the last half century in abridging distance,

communicating intelligence, lessening toil, improving

illumination, recording forever the human voice; and

on behalf of inventive genius it may be urged that its

beneficent results and gifts to mankind compare with

any to be credited to statesman, warrior, or creative

writer of the same period.



Viewed from the standpoint of inventive progress,

the first half of the nineteenth century had passed

very profitably when Edison appeared--every year

marked by some notable achievement in the arts and

sciences, with promise of its early and abundant fruition

in commerce and industry. There had been

exactly four decades of steam navigation on American

waters. Railways were growing at the rate of

nearly one thousand miles annually. Gas had become

familiar as a means of illumination in large cities.

Looms and tools and printing-presses were everywhere

being liberated from the slow toil of man-power.

The first photographs had been taken. Chloroform,

nitrous oxide gas, and ether had been placed at the

service of the physician in saving life, and the revolver,

guncotton, and nitroglycerine added to the agencies

for slaughter. New metals, chemicals, and elements

had become available in large numbers, gases had

been liquefied and solidified, and the range of useful

heat and cold indefinitely extended. The safety-lamp

had been given to the miner, the caisson to the bridge-

builder, the anti-friction metal to the mechanic for

bearings. It was already known how to vulcanize

rubber, and how to galvanize iron. The application of

machinery in the harvest-field had begun with the

embryonic reaper, while both the bicycle and the

automobile were heralded in primitive prototypes. The

gigantic expansion of the iron and steel industry was

foreshadowed in the change from wood to coal in the

smelting furnaces. The sewing-machine had brought

with it, like the friction match, one of the most profound

influences in modifying domestic life, and making

it different from that of all preceding time.



Even in 1847 few of these things had lost their

novelty, most of them were in the earlier stages of

development. But it is when we turn to electricity

that the rich virgin condition of an illimitable new

kingdom of discovery is seen. Perhaps the word

"utilization" or "application" is better than discovery,

for then, as now, an endless wealth of phenomena

noted by experimenters from Gilbert to

Franklin and Faraday awaited the invention that

could alone render them useful to mankind. The

eighteenth century, keenly curious and ceaselessly active

in this fascinating field of investigation, had not,

after all, left much of a legacy in either principles or

appliances. The lodestone and the compass; the

frictional machine; the Leyden jar; the nature of conductors

and insulators; the identity of electricity and

the thunder-storm flash; the use of lightning-rods;

the physiological effects of an electrical shock--these

constituted the bulk of the bequest to which philosophers

were the only heirs. Pregnant with possibilities

were many of the observations that had been

recorded. But these few appliances made up the

meagre kit of tools with which the nineteenth century

entered upon its task of acquiring the arts and conveniences

now such an intimate part of "human nature's

daily food" that the average American to-day

pays more for his electrical service than he does for

bread.



With the first year of the new century came Volta's

invention of the chemical battery as a means of producing

electricity. A well-known Italian picture represents

Volta exhibiting his apparatus before the

young conqueror Napoleon, then ravishing from the

Peninsula its treasure of ancient art and founding an

ephemeral empire. At such a moment this gift of de-

spoiled Italy to the world was a noble revenge, setting

in motion incalculable beneficent forces and agencies.

For the first time man had command of a steady supply

of electricity without toil or effort. The useful

results obtainable previously from the current of a

frictional machine were not much greater than those

to be derived from the flight of a rocket. While the

frictional appliance is still employed in medicine, it

ranks with the flint axe and the tinder-box in industrial

obsolescence. No art or trade could be founded

on it; no diminution of daily work or increase of daily

comfort could be secured with it. But the little battery

with its metal plates in a weak solution proved

a perennial reservoir of electrical energy, safe and

controllable, from which supplies could be drawn at will.

That which was wild had become domesticated; regular

crops took the place of haphazard gleanings from

brake or prairie; the possibility of electrical starvation

was forever left behind.



Immediately new processes of inestimable value

revealed themselves; new methods were suggested.

Almost all the electrical arts now employed made

their beginnings in the next twenty-five years, and

while the more extensive of them depend to-day on

the dynamo for electrical energy, some of the most

important still remain in loyal allegiance to the older

source. The battery itself soon underwent modifications,

and new types were evolved--the storage,

the double-fluid, and the dry. Various analogies

next pointed to the use of heat, and the thermoelectric

cell emerged, embodying the application of

flame to the junction of two different metals. Davy,

of the safety-lamp, threw a volume of current across

the gap between two sticks of charcoal, and the voltaic

arc, forerunner of electric lighting, shed its bright

beams upon a dazzled world. The decomposition of

water by electrolytic action was recognized and made

the basis of communicating at a distance even

before the days of the electromagnet. The ties

that bind electricity and magnetism in twinship of

relation and interaction were detected, and Faraday's

work in induction gave the world at once the

dynamo and the motor. "Hitch your wagon to a

star," said Emerson. To all the coal-fields and all

the waterfalls Faraday had directly hitched the wheels

of industry. Not only was it now possible to convert

mechanical energy into electricity cheaply and in

illimitable quantities, but electricity at once showed

its ubiquitous availability as a motive power. Boats

were propelled by it, cars were hauled, and even papers

printed. Electroplating became an art, and telegraphy

sprang into active being on both sides of the

Atlantic.



At the time Edison was born, in 1847, telegraphy,

upon which he was to leave so indelible an imprint,

had barely struggled into acceptance by the public.

In England, Wheatstone and Cooke had introduced a

ponderous magnetic needle telegraph. In America, in

1840, Morse had taken out his first patent on an electromagnetic

telegraph, the principle of which is dominating

in the art to this day. Four years later the

memorable message "What hath God wrought!" was

sent by young Miss Ellsworth over his circuits, and

incredulous Washington was advised by wire of the

action of the Democratic Convention in Baltimore in

nominating Polk. By 1847 circuits had been strung

between Washington and New York, under private

enterprise, the Government having declined to buy

the Morse system for $100,000. Everything was crude

and primitive. The poles were two hundred feet apart

and could barely hold up a wash-line. The slim, bare,

copper wire snapped on the least provocation, and the

circuit was "down" for thirty-six days in the first six

months. The little glass-knob insulators made seductive

targets for ignorant sportsmen. Attempts to insulate

the line wire were limited to coating it with tar

or smearing it with wax for the benefit of all the bees

in the neighborhood. The farthest western reach of

the telegraph lines in 1847 was Pittsburg, with three-

ply iron wire mounted on square glass insulators with

a little wooden pentroof for protection. In that office,

where Andrew Carnegie was a messenger boy, the

magnets in use to receive the signals sent with the aid

of powerful nitric-acid batteries weighed as much as

seventy-five pounds apiece. But the business was

fortunately small at the outset, until the new device,

patronized chiefly by lottery-men, had proved its

utility. Then came the great outburst of activity.

Within a score of years telegraph wires covered the

whole occupied country with a network, and the first

great electrical industry was a pronounced success,

yielding to its pioneers the first great harvest of

electrical fortunes. It had been a sharp struggle for bare

existence, during which such a man as the founder of

Cornell University had been glad to get breakfast in

New York with a quarter-dollar picked up on Broadway.

