





CHAPTER IX



THE TELEPHONE, MOTOGRAPH, AND MICROPHONE



A VERY great invention has its own dramatic history.

Episodes full of human interest attend

its development. The periods of weary struggle, the

daring adventure along unknown paths, the clash of

rival claimants, are closely similar to those which

mark the revelation and subjugation of a new continent.

At the close of the epoch of discovery it is

seen that mankind as a whole has made one more

great advance; but in the earlier stages one watched

chiefly the confused vicissitudes of fortune of the

individual pioneers. The great modern art of telephony

has had thus in its beginnings, its evolution,

and its present status as a universal medium of

intercourse, all the elements of surprise, mystery,

swift creation of wealth, tragic interludes, and colossal

battle that can appeal to the imagination and hold

public attention. And in this new electrical industry,

in laying its essential foundations, Edison has

again been one of the dominant figures.



As far back as 1837, the American, Page, discovered

the curious fact that an iron bar, when magnetized

and demagnetized at short intervals of time, emitted

sounds due to the molecular disturbances in the

mass. Philipp Reis, a simple professor in Germany,

utilized this principle in the construction of apparatus

for the transmission of sound; but in the grasp of

the idea he was preceded by Charles Bourseul, a

young French soldier in Algeria, who in 1854, under

the title of "Electrical Telephony," in a Parisian

illustrated paper, gave a brief and lucid description as

follows:





"We know that sounds are made by vibrations, and

are made sensible to the ear by the same vibrations, which

are reproduced by the intervening medium. But the intensity

of the vibrations diminishes very rapidly with the

distance; so that even with the aid of speaking-tubes and

trumpets it is impossible to exceed somewhat narrow

limits. Suppose a man speaks near a movable disk

sufficiently flexible to lose none of the vibrations of the

voice; that this disk alternately makes and breaks the

connection with a battery; you may have at a distance

another disk which will simultaneously execute the same

vibrations.... Any one who is not deaf and dumb may

use this mode of transmission, which would require no

apparatus except an electric battery, two vibrating disks,

and a wire."



This would serve admirably for a portrayal of the

Bell telephone, except that it mentions distinctly

the use of the make-and-break method (i. e., where

the circuit is necessarily opened and closed as in

telegraphy, although, of course, at an enormously

higher rate), which has never proved practical.



So far as is known Bourseul was not practical

enough to try his own suggestion, and never made

a telephone. About 1860, Reis built several forms

of electrical telephonic apparatus, all imitating in

some degree the human ear, with its auditory tube,

tympanum, etc., and examples of the apparatus were

exhibited in public not only in Germany, but in

England. There is a variety of testimony to the

effect that not only musical sounds, but stray words

and phrases, were actually transmitted with mediocre,

casual success. It was impossible, however, to maintain

the devices in adjustment for more than a few

seconds, since the invention depended upon the

make-and-break principle, the circuit being made and

broken every time an impulse-creating sound went

through it, causing the movement of the diaphragm

on which the sound-waves impinged. Reis himself

does not appear to have been sufficiently interested

in the marvellous possibilities of the idea to follow

it up--remarking to the man who bought his telephonic

instruments and tools that he had shown the

world the way. In reality it was not the way, although

a monument erected to his memory at Frankfort

styles him the inventor of the telephone. As

one of the American judges said, in deciding an early

litigation over the invention of the telephone, a hundred

years of Reis would not have given the world

the telephonic art for public use. Many others after

Reis tried to devise practical make-and-break telephones,

and all failed; although their success would

have rendered them very valuable as a means of

fighting the Bell patent. But the method was a good

starting-point, even if it did not indicate the real

path. If Reis had been willing to experiment with

his apparatus so that it did not make-and-break, he

would probably have been the true father of the

telephone, besides giving it the name by which it is

known. It was not necessary to slam the gate open

and shut. All that was required was to keep the

gate closed, and rattle the latch softly. Incidentally

it may be noted that Edison in experimenting with

the Reis transmitter recognized at once the defect

caused by the make-and-break action, and sought

to keep the gap closed by the use, first, of one drop

of water, and later of several drops. But the water

decomposed, and the incurable defect was still there.



The Reis telephone was brought to America by

Dr. P. H. Van der Weyde, a well-known physicist in

his day, and was exhibited by him before a technical

audience at Cooper Union, New York, in 1868, and

described shortly after in the technical press. The

apparatus attracted attention, and a set was secured

by Prof. Joseph Henry for the Smithsonian Institution.

There the famous philosopher showed and explained

it to Alexander Graham Bell, when that

young and persevering Scotch genius went to get

help and data as to harmonic telegraphy, upon which

he was working, and as to transmitting vocal sounds.

Bell took up immediately and energetically the idea

that his two predecessors had dropped--and reached

the goal. In 1875 Bell, who as a student and teacher

of vocal physiology had unusual qualifications for

determining feasible methods of speech transmission,

constructed his first pair of magneto telephones for

such a purpose. In February of 1876 his first telephone

patent was applied for, and in March it was

issued. The first published account of the modern

speaking telephone was a paper read by Bell before

the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Bos-

ton in May of that year; while at the Centennial

Exposition at Philadelphia the public first gained

any familiarity with it. It was greeted at once with

scientific acclaim and enthusiasm as a distinctly new

and great invention, although at first it was regarded

more as a scientific toy than as a commercially valuable

device.



By an extraordinary coincidence, the very day that

Bell's application for a patent went into the United

States Patent Office, a caveat was filed there by

Elisha Gray, of Chicago, covering the specific idea of

transmitting speech and reproducing it in a telegraphic

circuit "through an instrument capable of

vibrating responsively to all the tones of the human

voice, and by which they are rendered audible." Out

of this incident arose a struggle and a controversy

whose echoes are yet heard as to the legal and moral

rights of the two inventors, the assertion even being

made that one of the most important claims of Gray,

that on a liquid battery transmitter, was surreptitiously

"lifted" into the Bell application, then covering

only the magneto telephone. It was also asserted

that the filing of the Gray caveat antedated by a few

hours the filing of the Bell application. All such issues

when brought to the American courts were brushed

aside, the Bell patent being broadly maintained in

all its remarkable breadth and fullness, embracing

an entire art; but Gray was embittered and chagrined,

and to the last expressed his belief that the

honor and glory should have been his. The path of

Gray to the telephone was a natural one. A Quaker

carpenter who studied five years at Oberlin College,

he took up electrical invention, and brought out

many ingenious devices in rapid succession in the

telegraphic field, including the now universal needle

annunciator for hotels, etc., the useful telautograph,

automatic self-adjusting relays, private-line printers

--leading up to his famous "harmonic" system.

This was based upon the principle that a sound

produced in the presence of a reed or tuning-fork

responding to the sound, and acting as the armature of

a magnet in a closed circuit, would, by induction,

set up electric impulses in the circuit and cause a

distant magnet having a similarly tuned armature to

produce the same tone or note. He also found that

over the same wire at the same time another series

of impulses corresponding to another note could be

sent through the agency of a second set of magnets

without in any way interfering with the first series

of impulses. Building the principle into apparatus,

with a keyboard and vibrating "reeds" before his

magnets, Doctor Gray was able not only to transmit

music by his harmonic telegraph, but went so far as

to send nine different telegraph messages at the

same instant, each set of instruments depending on

its selective note, while any intermediate office could

pick up the message for itself by simply tuning its

relays to the keynote required. Theoretically the

system could be split up into any number of notes

and semi-tones. Practically it served as the basis

of some real telegraphic work, but is not now in use.

Any one can realize, however, that it did not take so

acute and ingenious a mind very long to push forward

to the telephone, as a dangerous competitor

with Bell, who had also, like Edison, been working

assiduously in the field of acoustic and multiple telegraphs.

Seen in the retrospect, the struggle for the

goal at this moment was one of the memorable incidents

in electrical history.



Among the interesting papers filed at the Orange

Laboratory is a lithograph, the size of an ordinary

patent drawing, headed "First Telephone on Record."

The claim thus made goes back to the period

when all was war, and when dispute was hot and rife

as to the actual invention of the telephone. The

device shown, made by Edison in 1875, was actually

included in a caveat filed January 14, 1876, a month

before Bell or Gray. It shows a little solenoid

arrangement, with one end of the plunger attached to

the diaphragm of a speaking or resonating chamber.

Edison states that while the device is crudely capable

of use as a magneto telephone, he did not invent it

for transmitting speech, but as an apparatus for

analyzing the complex waves arising from various

sounds. It was made in pursuance of his investigations

into the subject of harmonic telegraphs. He

did not try the effect of sound-waves produced by

the human voice until Bell came forward a few months

later; but he found then that this device, made in

1875, was capable of use as a telephone. In his testimony

and public utterances Edison has always given

Bell credit for the discovery of the transmission of

articulate speech by talking against a diaphragm

placed in front of an electromagnet; but it is only

proper here to note, in passing, the curious fact that

he had actually produced a device that COULD talk,

prior to 1876, and was therefore very close to Bell,

who took the one great step further. A strong

characterization of the value and importance of the work

done by Edison in the development of the carbon

transmitter will be found in the decision of Judge

Brown in the United States Circuit Court of Appeals,

sitting in Boston, on February 27, 1901, declaring

void the famous Berliner patent of the Bell telephone

system.[5]





[5] See Federal Reporter, vol. 109, p. 976 et seq.





Bell's patent of 1876 was of an all-embracing character,

which only the make-and-break principle, if

practical, could have escaped. It was pointed out

in the patent that Bell discovered the great principle

that electrical undulations induced by the vibrations

of a current produced by sound-waves can be

represented graphically by the same sinusoidal curve

that expresses the original sound vibrations themselves;

or, in other words, that a curve representing

sound vibrations will correspond precisely to a curve

representing electric impulses produced or generated

by those identical sound vibrations--as, for example,

when the latter impinge upon a diaphragm acting

as an armature of an electromagnet, and which by

movement to and fro sets up the electric impulses by

induction. To speak plainly, the electric impulses

correspond in form and character to the sound vibration

which they represent. This reduced to a patent

"claim" governed the art as firmly as a papal bull

for centuries enabled Spain to hold the Western

world. The language of the claim is: "The method

of and apparatus for transmitting vocal or other

sounds telegraphically as herein described, by causing

electrical undulations similar in form to the vibrations

of the air accompanying the said vocal or other

sounds substantially as set forth." It was a long

time, however, before the inclusive nature of this

grant over every possible telephone was understood

or recognized, and litigation for and against the

patent lasted during its entire life. At the outset,

the commercial value of the telephone was little

appreciated by the public, and Bell had the greatest

difficulty in securing capital; but among far-sighted

inventors there was an immediate "rush to the gold

fields." Bell's first apparatus was poor, the results

being described by himself as "unsatisfactory and

discouraging," which was almost as true of the

devices he exhibited at the Philadelphia Centennial.

The new-comers, like Edison, Berliner, Blake, Hughes,

Gray, Dolbear, and others, brought a wealth of ideas,

a fund of mechanical ingenuity, and an inventive

ability which soon made the telephone one of the

most notable gains of the century, and one of the

most valuable additions to human resources. The

work that Edison did was, as usual, marked by

infinite variety of method as well as by the power to

seize on the one needed element of practical success.

Every one of the six million telephones in use in the

United States, and of the other millions in use through

out the world, bears the imprint of his genius, as at

one time the instruments bore his stamped name.

For years his name was branded on every Bell telephone

set, and his patents were a mainstay of what

has been popularly called the "Bell monopoly."

Speaking of his own efforts in this field, Mr. Edison

says:



"In 1876 I started again to experiment for the

Western Union and Mr. Orton. This time it was the

telephone. Bell invented the first telephone, which

consisted of the present receiver, used both as a

transmitter and a receiver (the magneto type). It

was attempted to introduce it commercially, but it

failed on account of its faintness and the extraneous

sounds which came in on its wires from various

causes. Mr. Orton wanted me to take hold of it and

make it commercial. As I had also been working on

a telegraph system employing tuning-forks,

simultaneously with both Bell and Gray, I was pretty

familiar with the subject. I started in, and soon

produced the carbon transmitter, which is now

universally used.



"Tests were made between New York and Philadelphia,

also between New York and Washington,

using regular Western Union wires. The noises were

so great that not a word could be heard with the Bell

receiver when used as a transmitter between New

York and Newark, New Jersey. Mr. Orton and

W. K. Vanderbilt and the board of directors witnessed

and took part in the tests. The Western

Union then put them on private lines. Mr. Theodore

Puskas, of Budapest, Hungary, was the first man

to suggest a telephone exchange, and soon after

exchanges were established. The telephone department

was put in the hands of Hamilton McK. Twombly,

Vanderbilt's ablest son-in-law, who made a success

of it. The Bell company, of Boston, also started an

exchange, and the fight was on, the Western Union

pirating the Bell receiver, and the Boston company

pirating the Western Union transmitter. About this

time I wanted to be taken care of. I threw out hints

of this desire. Then Mr. Orton sent for me. He had

learned that inventors didn't do business by the

regular process, and concluded he would close it

right up. He asked me how much I wanted. I had

made up my mind it was certainly worth $25,000,

if it ever amounted to anything for central-station

work, so that was the sum I had in mind to stick to

and get--obstinately. Still it had been an easy job,

and only required a few months, and I felt a little

shaky and uncertain. So I asked him to make me

an offer. He promptly said he would give me

$100,000. `All right,' I said. `It is yours on one

condition, and that is that you do not pay it all at

once, but pay me at the rate of $6000 per year for

seventeen years'--the life of the patent. He seemed

only too pleased to do this, and it was closed. My

ambition was about four times too large for my

business capacity, and I knew that I would soon

spend this money experimenting if I got it all at

once, so I fixed it that I couldn't. I saved seventeen

years of worry by this stroke."



Thus modestly is told the debut of Edison in the

telephone art, to which with his carbon transmitter

he gave the valuable principle of varying the resistance

of the transmitting circuit with changes in the

pressure, as well as the vital practice of using the

induction coil as a means of increasing the effective

length of the talking circuit. Without these, modern

telephony would not and could not exist.[6] But Edison,

in telephonic work, as in other directions, was

remarkably fertile and prolific. His first inventions

in the art, made in 1875-76, continue through many

later years, including all kinds of carbon instruments

--the water telephone, electrostatic telephone,

condenser telephone, chemical telephone, various

magneto telephones, inertia telephone, mercury telephone,

voltaic pile telephone, musical transmitter, and

the electromotograph. All were actually made and

tested.





[6] Briefly stated, the essential difference between Bell's

telephone and Edison's is this: With the former the sound vibrations

impinge upon a steel diaphragm arranged adjacent to the pole of

a bar electromagnet, whereby the diaphragm acts as an armature,

and by its vibrations induces very weak electric impulses

in the magnetic coil. These impulses, according to Bell's theory,

correspond in form to the sound-waves, and passing over the line

energize the magnet coil at the receiving end, and by varying the

magnetism cause the receiving diaphragm to be similarly vibrated

to reproduce the sounds. A single apparatus is therefore used at

each end, performing the double function of transmitter and receiver.

With Edison's telephone a closed circuit is used on which

is constantly flowing a battery current, and included in that circuit

is a pair of electrodes, one or both of which is of carbon.

These electrodes are always in contact with a certain initial

pressure, so that current will be always flowing over the circuit.

One of the electrodes is connected with the diaphragm on which

the sound-waves impinge, and the vibration of this diaphragm

causes the pressure between the electrodes to be correspondingly

varied, and thereby effects a variation in the current, resulting in

the production of impulses which actuate the receiving magnet.

In other words, with Bell's telephone the sound-waves themselves

generate the electric impulses, which are hence extremely

faint. With the Edison telephone, the sound-waves actuate an

electric valve, so to speak, and permit variations in a current of

any desired strength.



A second distinction between the two telephones is this: With

the Bell apparatus the very weak electric impulses generated by

the vibration of the transmitting diaphragm pass over the entire

line to the receiving end, and in consequence the permissible

length of line is limited to a few miles under ideal conditions.

With Edison's telephone the battery current does not flow on

the main line, but passes through the primary circuit of an

induction coil, by which corresponding impulses of enormously

higher potential are sent out on the main line to the receiving

end. In consequence, the line may be hundreds of miles in

length. No modern telephone system in use to-day lacks these

characteristic features--the varying resistance and the induction

coil.





The principle of the electromotograph was utilized

by Edison in more ways than one, first of all in telegraphy

at this juncture. The well-known Page patent,

which had lingered in the Patent Office for years, had

just been issued, and was considered a formidable

weapon. It related to the use of a retractile spring

to withdraw the armature lever from the magnet of

a telegraph or other relay or sounder, and thus controlled

the art of telegraphy, except in simple circuits.

"There was no known way," remarks Edison,

"whereby this patent could be evaded, and its

possessor would eventually control the use of what

is known as the relay and sounder, and this was vital

to telegraphy. Gould was pounding the Western

Union on the Stock Exchange, disturbing its railroad

contracts, and, being advised by his lawyers that

this patent was of great value, bought it. The moment

Mr. Orton heard this he sent for me and explained

the situation, and wanted me to go to work

immediately and see if I couldn't evade it or discover

some other means that could be used in case Gould

sustained the patent. It seemed a pretty hard job,

because there was no known means of moving a

lever at the other end of a telegraph wire except by

the use of a magnet. I said I would go at it that

night. In experimenting some years previously, I

had discovered a very peculiar phenomenon, and that

was that if a piece of metal connected to a battery

was rubbed over a moistened piece of chalk resting

on a metal connected to the other pole, when the

current passed the friction was greatly diminished.

When the current was reversed the friction was greatly

increased over what it was when no current was

passing. Remembering this, I substituted a piece of

chalk rotated by a small electric motor for the magnet,

and connecting a sounder to a metallic finger

resting on the chalk, the combination claim of Page

was made worthless. A hitherto unknown means was

introduced in the electric art. Two or three of the

devices were made and tested by the company's expert.

Mr. Orton, after he had me sign the patent

application and got it in the Patent Office, wanted

to settle for it at once. He asked my price. Again

I said: `Make me an offer.' Again he named $100,000.

I accepted, providing he would pay it at the

rate of $6000 a year for seventeen years. This was

done, and thus, with the telephone money, I received

$12,000 yearly for that period from the Western

Union Telegraph Company."



A year or two later the motograph cropped up again

in Edison's work in a curious manner. The telephone

was being developed in England, and Edison had

made arrangements with Colonel Gouraud, his old

associate in the automatic telegraph, to represent his

interests. A company was formed, a large number

of instruments were made and sent to Gouraud in

London, and prospects were bright. Then there came

a threat of litigation from the owners of the Bell

patent, and Gouraud found he could not push the

enterprise unless he could avoid using what was asserted

to be an infringement of the Bell receiver.

He cabled for help to Edison, who sent back word

telling him to hold the fort. "I had recourse again,"

says Edison, "to the phenomenon discovered by me

years previous, that the friction of a rubbing electrode

passing over a moist chalk surface was varied by

electricity. I devised a telephone receiver which

was afterward known as the `loud-speaking telephone,'

or `chalk receiver.' There was no magnet,

simply a diaphragm and a cylinder of compressed

chalk about the size of a thimble. A thin spring

connected to the centre of the diaphragm extended

outwardly and rested on the chalk cylinder, and was

pressed against it with a pressure equal to that which

would be due to a weight of about six pounds. The

chalk was rotated by hand. The volume of sound

was very great. A person talking into the carbon

transmitter in New York had his voice so amplified

that he could be heard one thousand feet away in

an open field at Menlo Park. This great excess of

power was due to the fact that the latter came from

the person turning the handle. The voice, instead

of furnishing all the power as with the present receiver,

merely controlled the power, just as an engineer

working a valve would control a powerful

engine.



"I made six of these receivers and sent them in

charge of an expert on the first steamer. They were

welcomed and tested, and shortly afterward I shipped

a hundred more. At the same time I was ordered to

send twenty young men, after teaching them to become

expert. I set up an exchange, around the

laboratory, of ten instruments. I would then go out

and get each one out of order in every conceivable

way, cutting the wires of one, short-circuiting another,

destroying the adjustment of a third, putting

dirt between the electrodes of a fourth, and so on.

A man would be sent to each to find out the trouble.

When he could find the trouble ten consecutive

times, using five minutes each, he was sent to London.

About sixty men were sifted to get twenty.

Before all had arrived, the Bell company there, seeing

we could not be stopped, entered into negotiations

for consolidation. One day I received a cable from

Gouraud offering `30,000' for my interest. I cabled

back I would accept. When the draft came I was

astonished to find it was for L30,000. I had thought

it was dollars."



In regard to this singular and happy conclusion,

Edison makes some interesting comments as to the

attitude of the courts toward inventors, and the

difference between American and English courts. "The

men I sent over were used to establish telephone

exchanges all over the Continent, and some of them

became wealthy. It was among this crowd in London

that Bernard Shaw was employed before he became

famous. The chalk telephone was finally discarded

in favor of the Bell receiver--the latter being

more simple and cheaper. Extensive litigation with

new-comers followed. My carbon-transmitter patent

was sustained, and preserved the monopoly of the

telephone in England for many years. Bell's patent

was not sustained by the courts. Sir Richard Webster,

now Chief-Justice of England, was my counsel,

and sustained all of my patents in England for many

years. Webster has a marvellous capacity for understanding

things scientific; and his address before the

courts was lucidity itself. His brain is highly organized.

My experience with the legal fraternity is

that scientific subjects are distasteful to them, and

it is rare in this country, on account of the system of

trying patent suits, for a judge really to reach the

meat of the controversy, and inventors scarcely ever

get a decision squarely and entirely in their favor.

The fault rests, in my judgment, almost wholly with

the system under which testimony to the extent of

thousands of pages bearing on all conceivable subjects,

many of them having no possible connection

with the invention in dispute, is presented to an over-

worked judge in an hour or two of argument supported

by several hundred pages of briefs; and the

judge is supposed to extract some essence of justice

from this mass of conflicting, blind, and misleading

statements. It is a human impossibility, no matter

how able and fair-minded the judge may be. In

England the case is different. There the judges are

face to face with the experts and other witnesses.

They get the testimony first-hand and only so much as

they need, and there are no long-winded briefs and

arguments, and the case is decided then and there,

a few months perhaps after suit is brought, instead of

many years afterward, as in this country. And in

England, when a case is once finally decided it is

settled for the whole country, while here it is not so.

Here a patent having once been sustained, say, in

Boston, may have to be litigated all over again in

New York, and again in Philadelphia, and so on for

all the Federal circuits. Furthermore, it seems to

me that scientific disputes should be decided by some

court containing at least one or two scientific men--

men capable of comprehending the significance of

an invention and the difficulties of its accomplishment

--if justice is ever to be given to an inventor.

And I think, also, that this court should have the

power to summon before it and examine any recognized

expert in the special art, who might be able to

testify to FACTS for or against the patent, instead of

trying to gather the truth from the tedious essays

of hired experts, whose depositions are really nothing

but sworn arguments. The real gist of patent suits

is generally very simple, and I have no doubt that

any judge of fair intelligence, assisted by one or more

scientific advisers, could in a couple of days at the

most examine all the necessary witnesses; hear all

the necessary arguments, and actually decide an ordinary

patent suit in a way that would more nearly

be just, than can now be done at an expenditure of

a hundred times as much money and months and

years of preparation. And I have no doubt that

the time taken by the court would be enormously

less, because if a judge attempts to read the bulky

records and briefs, that work alone would require

several days.



"Acting as judges, inventors would not be very apt

to correctly decide a complicated law point; and on

the other hand, it is hard to see how a lawyer can

decide a complicated scientific point rightly. Some

inventors complain of our Patent Office, but my own

experience with the Patent Office is that the examiners

are fair-minded and intelligent, and when they

refuse a patent they are generally right; but I think

the whole trouble lies with the system in vogue in the

Federal courts for trying patent suits, and in the fact,

which cannot be disputed, that the Federal judges,

with but few exceptions, do not comprehend complicated

scientific questions. To secure uniformity

in the several Federal circuits and correct errors, it

has been proposed to establish a central court of

patent appeals in Washington. This I believe in;

but this court should also contain at least two scientific

men, who would not be blind to the sophistry of

paid experts.[7] Men whose inventions would have

created wealth of millions have been ruined and

prevented from making any money whereby they could

continue their careers as creators of wealth for the

general good, just because the experts befuddled the

judge by their misleading statements."





[7] As an illustration of the perplexing nature of expert evidence in

patent cases, the reader will probably be interested in perusing

the following extracts from the opinion of Judge Dayton, in the

suit of Bryce Bros. Co. vs. Seneca Glass Co., tried in the United

States Circuit Court, Northern District of West Virginia, reported

in The Federal Reporter, 140, page 161:



"On this subject of the validity of this patent, a vast amount

of conflicting, technical, perplexing, and almost hypercritical

discussion and opinion has been indulged, both in the testimony and

in the able and exhaustive arguments and briefs of counsel.

Expert Osborn for defendant, after setting forth minutely his

superior qualifications mechanical education, and great experience,

takes up in detail the patent claims, and shows to his own

entire satisfaction that none of them are new; that all of them

have been applied, under one form or another, in some twenty-

two previous patents, and in two other machines, not patented,

to-wit, the Central Glass and Kuny Kahbel ones; that the whole

machine is only `an aggregation of well-known mechanical elements

that any skilled designer would bring to his use in the

construction of such a machine.' This certainly, under ordinary

conditions, would settle the matter beyond peradventure; for

this witness is a very wise and learned man in these things, and

very positive. But expert Clarke appears for the plaintiff, and

after setting forth just as minutely his superior qualifications,

mechanical education, and great experience, which appear fully

equal in all respects to those of expert Osborn, proceeds to take

up in detail the patent claims, and shows to his entire satisfaction

that all, with possibly one exception, are new, show inventive

genius, and distinct advances upon the prior art. In the most

lucid, and even fascinating, way he discusses all the parts of this

machine, compares it with the others, draws distinctions, points

out the merits of the one in controversy and the defects of all

the others, considers the twenty-odd patents referred to by

Osborn, and in the politest, but neatest, manner imaginable shows

that expert Osborn did not know what he was talking about, and

sums the whole matter up by declaring this `invention of Mr.

Schrader's, as embodied in the patent in suit, a radical and wide

departure, from the Kahbel machine' (admitted on all sides to be

nearest prior approach to it), `a distinct and important advance

in the art of engraving glassware, and generally a machine for

this purpose which has involved the exercise of the inventive

faculty in the highest degree.'



"Thus a more radical and irreconcilable disagreement between

experts touching the same thing could hardly be found. So it is

with the testimony. If we take that for the defendant, the Central

Glass Company machine, and especially the Kuny Kahbel

machine, built and operated years before this patent issued, and

not patented, are just as good, just as effective and practical, as

this one, and capable of turning out just as perfect work and as

great a variety of it. On the other hand, if we take that produced

by the plaintiff, we are driven to the conclusion that these

prior machines, the product of the same mind, were only progressive

steps forward from utter darkness, so to speak, into full

inventive sunlight, which made clear to him the solution of the

problem in this patented machine. The shortcomings of the

earlier machines are minutely set forth, and the witnesses for the

plaintiff are clear that they are neither practical nor profitable.



"But this is not all of the trouble that confronts us in this

case. Counsel of both sides, with an indomitable courage that

must command admiration, a courage that has led them to a vast

amount of study, investigation, and thought, that in fact has

made them all experts, have dissected this record of 356 closely

printed pages, applied all mechanical principles and laws to the

facts as they see them, and, besides, have ransacked the law-

books and cited an enormous number of cases, more or less in

point, as illustration of their respective contentions. The courts

find nothing more difficult than to apply an abstract principle to

all classes of cases that may arise. The facts in each case so

frequently create an exception to the general rule that such rule

must be honored rather in its breach than in its observance.

Therefore, after a careful examination of these cases, it is no

criticism of the courts to say that both sides have found abundant

and about an equal amount of authority to sustain their

respective contentions, and, as a result, counsel have submitted,

in briefs, a sum total of 225 closely printed pages, in which they

have clearly, yet, almost to a mathematical certainty, demonstrated

on the one side that this Schrader machine is new and

patentable, and on the other that it is old and not so. Under

these circumstances, it would be unnecessary labor and a fruitless

task for me to enter into any further technical discussion of the

mechanical problems involved, for the purpose of seeking to convince

either side of its error. In cases of such perplexity as this

generally some incidents appear that speak more unerringly than

do the tongues of the witnesses, and to some of these I purpose

to now refer."







Mr. Bernard Shaw, the distinguished English author,

has given a most vivid and amusing picture of this

introduction of Edison's telephone into England, describing

the apparatus as "a much too ingenious invention,

being nothing less than a telephone of such

stentorian efficiency that it bellowed your most private

communications all over the house, instead of

whispering them with some sort of discretion." Shaw,

as a young man, was employed by the Edison Telephone

Company, and was very much alive to his

surroundings, often assisting in public demonstra-

tions of the apparatus "in a manner which I am

persuaded laid the foundation of Mr. Edison's

reputation." The sketch of the men sent over from

America is graphic: "Whilst the Edison Telephone

Company lasted it crowded the basement of a high

pile of offices in Queen Victoria Street with American

artificers. These deluded and romantic men gave

me a glimpse of the skilled proletariat of the United

States. They sang obsolete sentimental songs with

genuine emotion; and their language was frightful

even to an Irishman. They worked with a ferocious

energy which was out of all proportion to the actual

result achieved. Indomitably resolved to assert their

republican manhood by taking no orders from a tall-

hatted Englishman whose stiff politeness covered

his conviction that they were relatively to himself

inferior and common persons, they insisted on being

slave-driven with genuine American oaths by a

genuine free and equal American foreman. They

utterly despised the artfully slow British workman,

who did as little for his wages as he possibly could;

never hurried himself; and had a deep reverence for

one whose pocket could be tapped by respectful

behavior. Need I add that they were contemptuously

wondered at by this same British workman as

a parcel of outlandish adult boys who sweated themselves

for their employer's benefit instead of looking

after their own interest? They adored Mr. Edison as

the greatest man of all time in every possible department

of science, art, and philosophy, and execrated

Mr. Graham Bell, the inventor of the rival telephone,

as his Satanic adversary; but each of them had (or

intended to have) on the brink of completion an improvement

on the telephone, usually a new transmitter.

They were free-souled creatures, excellent

company, sensitive, cheerful, and profane; liars,

braggarts, and hustlers, with an air of making slow

old England hum, which never left them even when,

as often happened, they were wrestling with difficulties

of their own making, or struggling in no-

thoroughfares, from which they had to be retrieved

like stray sheep by Englishmen without imagination

enough to go wrong."



Mr. Samuel Insull, who afterward became private

secretary to Mr. Edison, and a leader in the development

of American electrical manufacturing and the

central-station art, was also in close touch with the

London situation thus depicted, being at the time

private secretary to Colonel Gouraud, and acting for

the first half hour as the amateur telephone operator

in the first experimental exchange erected in Europe.

He took notes of an early meeting where the affairs of

the company were discussed by leading men like Sir

John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) and the Right Hon.

E. P. Bouverie (then a cabinet minister), none of

whom could see in the telephone much more than an

auxiliary for getting out promptly in the next morning's

papers the midnight debates in Parliament. "I

remember another incident," says Mr. Insull. "It

was at some celebration of one of the Royal Societies

at the Burlington House, Piccadilly. We had a telephone

line running across the roofs to the basement

of the building. I think it was to Tyndall's laboratory

in Burlington Street. As the ladies and gentle-

men came through, they naturally wanted to look

at the great curiosity, the loud-speaking telephone: in

fact, any telephone was a curiosity then. Mr. and

Mrs. Gladstone came through. I was handling the

telephone at the Burlington House end. Mrs. Gladstone

asked the man over the telephone whether he

knew if a man or woman was speaking; and the

reply came in quite loud tones that it was a

man!"



With Mr. E. H. Johnson, who represented Edison,

there went to England for the furtherance of this

telephone enterprise, Mr. Charles Edison, a nephew of

the inventor. He died in Paris, October, 1879, not

twenty years of age. Stimulated by the example of

his uncle, this brilliant youth had already made a

mark for himself as a student and inventor, and when

only eighteen he secured in open competition the contract

to install a complete fire-alarm telegraph system

for Port Huron. A few months later he was eagerly

welcomed by his uncle at Menlo Park, and after working

on the telephone was sent to London to aid in its

introduction. There he made the acquaintance of

Professor Tyndall, exhibited the telephone to the

late King of England; and also won the friendship

of the late King of the Belgians, with whom he took

up the project of establishing telephonic communication

between Belgium and England. At the time

of his premature death he was engaged in installing

the Edison quadruplex between Brussels and Paris,

being one of the very few persons then in Europe

familiar with the working of that invention.



Meantime, the telephonic art in America was

undergoing very rapid development. In March,

1878, addressing "the capitalists of the Electric

Telephone Company" on the future of his invention,

Bell outlined with prophetic foresight and remarkable

clearness the coming of the modern telephone

exchange. Comparing with gas and water distribution,

he said: "In a similar manner, it is conceivable

that cables of telephone wires could be laid underground

or suspended overhead communicating by

branch wires with private dwellings, country houses,

shops, manufactories, etc., uniting them through the

main cable with a central office, where the wire could

be connected as desired, establishing direct

communication between any two places in the city....

Not only so, but I believe, in the future, wires will

unite the head offices of telephone companies in different

cities; and a man in one part of the country

may communicate by word of mouth with another

in a distant place."



All of which has come to pass. Professor Bell also

suggested how this could be done by "the employ of

a man in each central office for the purpose of connecting

the wires as directed." He also indicated the

two methods of telephonic tariff--a fixed rental and

a toll; and mentioned the practice, now in use on

long-distance lines, of a time charge. As a matter

of fact, this "centralizing" was attempted in May,

1877, in Boston, with the circuits of the Holmes

burglar-alarm system, four banking-houses being thus

interconnected; while in January of 1878 the Bell

telephone central-office system at New Haven, Connecticut,

was opened for business, "the first fully

equipped commercial telephone exchange ever established

for public or general service."



All through this formative period Bell had adhered

to and introduced the magneto form of telephone,

now used only as a receiver, and very poorly adapted

for the vital function of a speech-transmitter. From

August, 1877, the Western Union Telegraph Company

worked along the other line, and in 1878,

with its allied Gold & Stock Telegraph Company, it

brought into existence the American Speaking Telephone

Company to introduce the Edison apparatus,

and to create telephone exchanges all over the country.

In this warfare, the possession of a good battery

transmitter counted very heavily in favor of the

Western Union, for upon that the real expansion of

the whole industry depended; but in a few months

the Bell system had its battery transmitter, too,

tending to equalize matters. Late in the same year

patent litigation was begun which brought out clearly

the merits of Bell, through his patent, as the original

and first inventor of the electric speaking telephone;

and the Western Union Telegraph Company made

terms with its rival. A famous contract bearing

date of November 10, 1879, showed that under the

Edison and other controlling patents the Western

Union Company had already set going some eighty-

five exchanges, and was making large quantities of

telephonic apparatus. In return for its voluntary

retirement from the telephonic field, the Western

Union Telegraph Company, under this contract, received

a royalty of 20 per cent. of all the telephone

earnings of the Bell system while the Bell patents

ran; and thus came to enjoy an annual income of

several hundred thousand dollars for some years, based

chiefly on its modest investment in Edison's work.

It was also paid several thousand dollars in cash for

the Edison, Phelps, Gray, and other apparatus on

hand. It secured further 40 per cent. of the stock

of the local telephone systems of New York and

Chicago; and last, but by no means least, it exacted

from the Bell interests an agreement to stay out of

the telegraph field.



By March, 1881, there were in the United States

only nine cities of more than ten thousand inhabitants,

and only one of more than fifteen thousand,

without a telephone exchange. The industry thrived

under competition, and the absence of it now had a

decided effect in checking growth; for when the

Bell patent expired in 1893, the total of telephone sets

in operation in the United States was only 291,253.

To quote from an official Bell statement:





"The brief but vigorous Western Union competition

was a kind of blessing in disguise. The very fact that

two distinct interests were actively engaged in the work

of organizing and establishing competing telephone

exchanges all over the country, greatly facilitated the

spread of the idea and the growth of the business, and

familiarized the people with the use of the telephone as a

business agency; while the keenness of the competition,

extending to the agents and employees of both companies,

brought about a swift but quite unforeseen and unlooked-

for expansion in the individual exchanges of the larger

cities, and a corresponding advance in their importance,

value, and usefulness."



The truth of this was immediately shown in 1894,

after the Bell patents had expired, by the tremendous

outburst of new competitive activity, in "independent"

country systems and toll lines through

sparsely settled districts--work for which the Edison

apparatus and methods were peculiarly adapted, yet

against which the influence of the Edison patent

was invoked. The data secured by the United States

Census Office in 1902 showed that the whole industry

had made gigantic leaps in eight years, and had

2,371,044 telephone stations in service, of which

1,053,866 were wholly or nominally independent of

the Bell. By 1907 an even more notable increase

was shown, and the Census figures for that year

included no fewer than 6,118,578 stations, of which

1,986,575 were "independent." These six million

instruments every single set employing the principle

of the carbon transmitter--were grouped into 15,527

public exchanges, in the very manner predicted by

Bell thirty years before, and they gave service in the

shape of over eleven billions of talks. The outstanding

capitalized value of the plant was $814,616,004,

the income for the year was nearly $185,000,000, and

the people employed were 140,000. If Edison had

done nothing else, his share in the creation of such

an industry would have entitled him to a high place

among inventors.



This chapter is of necessity brief in its reference to

many extremely interesting points and details; and

to some readers it may seem incomplete in its references

to the work of other men than Edison, whose

influence on telephony as an art has also been con-

siderable. In reply to this pertinent criticism, it

may be pointed out that this is a life of Edison, and

not of any one else; and that even the discussion of

his achievements alone in these various fields

requires more space than the authors have at their

disposal. The attempt has been made, however, to

indicate the course of events and deal fairly with the

facts. The controversy that once waged with great

excitement over the invention of the microphone,

but has long since died away, is suggestive of the

difficulties involved in trying to do justice to everybody.

A standard history describes the microphone

thus:





"A form of apparatus produced during the early days

of the telephone by Professor Hughes, of England, for

the purpose of rendering faint, indistinct sounds distinctly

audible, depended for its operation on the changes that

result in the resistance of loose contacts. This apparatus

was called the microphone, and was in reality but one of

the many forms that it is possible to give to the telephone

transmitter. For example, the Edison granular transmitter

was a variety of microphone, as was also Edison's

transmitter, in which the solid button of carbon was employed.

Indeed, even the platinum point, which in the

early form of the Reis transmitter pressed against the

platinum contact cemented to the centre of the diaphragm,

was a microphone."



At a time when most people were amazed at the idea

of hearing, with the aid of a "microphone," a fly walk

at a distance of many miles, the priority of invention

of such a device was hotly disputed. Yet without

desiring to take anything from the credit of the

brilliant American, Hughes, whose telegraphic apparatus

is still in use all over Europe, it may be

pointed out that this passage gives Edison the attribution

of at least two original forms of which those

suggested by Hughes were mere variations and modifications.

With regard to this matter, Mr. Edison

himself remarks: "After I sent one of my men over

to London especially, to show Preece the carbon

transmitter, and where Hughes first saw it, and

heard it--then within a month he came out with the

microphone, without any acknowledgment whatever.

Published dates will show that Hughes came along

after me."



There have been other ways also in which Edison

has utilized the peculiar property that carbon possesses

of altering its resistance to the passage of current,

according to the pressure to which it is subjected,

whether at the surface, or through closer union

of the mass. A loose road with a few inches of dust

or pebbles on it offers appreciable resistance to the

wheels of vehicles travelling over it; but if the surface

is kept hard and smooth the effect is quite different.

In the same way carbon, whether solid or

in the shape of finely divided powder, offers a high

resistance to the passage of electricity; but if the

carbon is squeezed together the conditions change,

with less resistance to electricity in the circuit.

For his quadruplex system, Mr. Edison utilized this

fact in the construction of a rheostat or resistance

box. It consists of a series of silk disks saturated

with a sizing of plumbago and well dried. The disks

are compressed by means of an adjustable screw; and

in this manner the resistance of a circuit can be varied

over a wide range.



In like manner Edison developed a "pressure" or

carbon relay, adapted to the transference of signals

of variable strength from one circuit to another. An

ordinary relay consists of an electromagnet inserted

in the main line for telegraphing, which brings a local

battery and sounder circuit into play, reproducing

in the local circuit the signals sent over the main line.

The relay is adjusted to the weaker currents likely to

be received, but the signals reproduced on the sounder

by the agency of the relay are, of course, all of equal

strength, as they depend upon the local battery,

which has only this steady work to perform. In

cases where it is desirable to reproduce the signals in

the local circuit with the same variations in strength

as they are received by the relay, the Edison carbon

pressure relay does the work. The poles of the

electromagnet in the local circuit are hollowed out

and filled up with carbon disks or powdered plumbago.

The armature and the carbon-tipped poles of

the electromagnet form part of the local circuit; and

if the relay is actuated by a weak current the armature

will be attracted but feebly. The carbon being only

slightly compressed will offer considerable resistance

to the flow of current from the local battery, and

therefore the signal on the local sounder will be weak.

If, on the contrary, the incoming current on the main

line be strong, the armature will be strongly attracted,

the carbon will be sharply compressed, the resistance

in the local circuit will be proportionately lowered,

and the signal heard on the local sounder will be a

loud one. Thus it will be seen, by another clever

juggle with the willing agent, carbon, for which he

has found so many duties, Edison is able to transfer

or transmit exactly, to the local circuit, the main-line

current in all its minutest variations.



In his researches to determine the nature of the

motograph phenomena, and to open up other sources

of electrical current generation, Edison has worked

out a very ingenious and somewhat perplexing piece

of apparatus known as the "chalk battery." It consists

of a series of chalk cylinders mounted on a shaft

revolved by hand. Resting against each of these

cylinders is a palladium-faced spring, and similar

springs make contact with the shaft between each

cylinder. By connecting all these springs in circuit

with a galvanometer and revolving the shaft rapidly,

a notable deflection is obtained of the galvanometer

needle, indicating the production of electrical energy.

The reason for this does not appear to have been

determined.



Last but not least, in this beautiful and ingenious

series, comes the "tasimeter," an instrument of most

delicate sensibility in the presence of heat. The

name is derived from the Greek, the use of the apparatus

being primarily to measure extremely minute

differences of pressure. A strip of hard rubber with

pointed ends rests perpendicularly on a platinum

plate, beneath which is a carbon button, under which

again lies another platinum plate. The two plates

and the carbon button form part of an electric circuit

containing a battery and a galvanometer. The

hard-rubber strip is exceedingly sensitive to heat.

The slightest degree of heat imparted to it causes it

to expand invisibly, thus increasing the pressure contact

on the carbon button and producing a variation

in the resistance of the circuit, registered immediately

by the little swinging needle of the galvanometer.

The instrument is so sensitive that with a delicate

galvanometer it will show the impingement of the

heat from a person's hand thirty feet away. The

suggestion to employ such an apparatus in astronomical

observations occurs at once, and it may be

noted that in one instance the heat of rays of light

from the remote star Arcturus gave results.

