





CHAPTER IV



THE YOUNG TELEGRAPH OPERATOR



"WHILE a newsboy on the railroad," says Edison,

"I got very much interested in electricity,

probably from visiting telegraph offices with a chum

who had tastes similar to mine." It will also have

been noted that he used the telegraph to get items

for his little journal, and to bulletin his special news

of the Civil War along the line. The next step was

natural, and having with his knowledge of chemistry

no trouble about "setting up" his batteries, the

difficulties of securing apparatus were chiefly those

connected with the circuits and the instruments.

American youths to-day are given, if of a mechanical

turn of mind, to amateur telegraphy or telephony,

but seldom, if ever, have to make any part of the

system constructed. In Edison's boyish days it was

quite different, and telegraphic supplies were hard to

obtain. But he and his "chum" had a line between

their homes, built of common stove-pipe wire. The insulators

were bottles set on nails driven into trees and

short poles. The magnet wire was wound with rags for

insulation, and pieces of spring brass were used for

keys. With an idea of securing current cheaply,

Edison applied the little that he knew about static

electricity, and actually experimented with cats,

which he treated vigorously as frictional machines

until the animals fled in dismay, and Edison had

learned his first great lesson in the relative value of

sources of electrical energy. The line was made to

work, however, and additional to the messages that

the boys interchanged, Edison secured practice in an

ingenious manner. His father insisted on 11.30 as

proper bedtime, which left but a short interval after

the long day on the train. But each evening, when

the boy went home with a bundle of papers that had

not been sold in the town, his father would sit up

reading the "returnables." Edison, therefore, on

some excuse, left the papers with his friend, but

suggested that he could get the news from him by

telegraph, bit by bit. The scheme interested his

father, and was put into effect, the messages being

written down and handed over for perusal. This

yielded good practice nightly, lasting until 12 and 1

o'clock, and was maintained for some time until Mr.

Edison became willing that his son should stay up

for a reasonable time. The papers were then brought

home again, and the boys amused themselves to their

hearts' content until the line was pulled down by a

stray cow wandering through the orchard. Meantime

better instruments had been secured, and the

rudiments of telegraphy had been fairly mastered.



The mixed train on which Edison was employed as

newsboy did the way-freight work and shunting at

the Mount Clemens station, about half an hour being

usually spent in the work. One August morning, in

1862, while the shunting was in progress, and a laden

box-car had been pushed out of a siding, Edison, who

was loitering about the platform, saw the little son

of the station agent, Mr. J. U. Mackenzie, playing

with the gravel on the main track along which the

car without a brakeman was rapidly approaching.

Edison dropped his papers and his glazed cap, and

made a dash for the child, whom he picked up and

lifted to safety without a second to spare, as the wheel

of the car struck his heel; and both were cut about the

face and hands by the gravel ballast on which they

fell. The two boys were picked up by the train-hands

and carried to the platform, and the grateful father

at once offered to teach the rescuer, whom he knew

and liked, the art of train telegraphy and to make

an operator of him. It is needless to say that the

proposal was eagerly accepted.



Edison found time for his new studies by letting

one of his friends look after the newsboy work on the

train for part of the trip, reserving to himself the run

between Port Huron and Mount Clemens. That he

was already well qualified as a beginner is evident

from the fact that he had mastered the Morse code

of the telegraphic alphabet, and was able to take to

the station a neat little set of instruments he had

just finished with his own hands at a gun-shop in

Detroit. This was probably a unique achievement

in itself among railway operators of that day or of

later times. The drill of the student involved chiefly

the acquisition of the special signals employed in

railway work, including the numerals and abbreviations

applied to save time. Some of these have passed

into the slang of the day, "73" being well known as

a telegrapher's expression of compliments or good

wishes, while "23" is an accident or death message,

and has been given broader popular significance as

a general synonym for "hoodoo." All of this came

easily to Edison, who had, moreover, as his Herald

showed, an unusual familiarity with train movement

along that portion of the Grand Trunk road.



Three or four months were spent pleasantly and

profitably by the youth in this course of study, and

Edison took to it enthusiastically, giving it no less

than eighteen hours a day. He then put up a little

telegraph line from the station to the village, a distance

of about a mile, and opened an office in a drug

store; but the business was naturally very small.

The telegraph operator at Port Huron knowing of his

proficiency, and wanting to get into the United States

Military Telegraph Corps, where the pay in those days

of the Civil War was high, succeeded in convincing

his brother-in-law, Mr. M. Walker, that young Edison

could fill the position. Edison was, of course, well

acquainted with the operators along the road and at

the southern terminal, and took up his new duties

very easily. The office was located in a jewelry store,

where newspapers and periodicals were also sold.

Edison was to be found at the office both day and

night, sleeping there. "I became quite valuable to

Mr. Walker. After working all day I worked at the

office nights as well, for the reason that `press report'

came over one of the wires until 3 A.M., and I would

cut in and copy it as well as I could, to become more

rapidly proficient. The goal of the rural telegraph

operator was to be able to take press. Mr. Walker

tried to get my father to apprentice me at $20 per

month, but they could not agree. I then applied for

a job on the Grand Trunk Railroad as a railway

operator, and was given a place, nights, at Stratford

Junction, Canada." Apparently his friend Mackenzie

helped him in the matter. The position carried

a salary of $25 per month. No serious objections

were raised by his family, for the distance from Port

Huron was not great, and Stratford was near Bayfield,

the old home from which the Edisons had come,

so that there were doubtless friends or even relatives

in the vicinity. This was in 1863.



Mr. Walker was an observant man, who has since

that time installed a number of waterworks systems

and obtained several patents of his own. He describes

the boy of sixteen as engrossed intensely in

his experiments and scientific reading, and somewhat

indifferent, for this reason, to his duties as operator.

This office was not particularly busy, taking from

$50 to $75 a month, but even the messages taken

in would remain unsent on the hook while Edison

was in the cellar below trying to solve some chemical

problem. The manager would see him studying

sometimes an article in such a paper as the Scientific

American, and then disappearing to buy a few sundries

for experiments. Returning from the drug

store with his chemicals, he would not be seen again

until required by his duties, or until he had found out

for himself, if possible, in this offhand manner,

whether what he had read was correct or not. When

he had completed his experiment all interest in it

was lost, and the jars and wires would be left to any

fate that might befall them. In like manner Edison

would make free use of the watchmaker's tools that

lay on the little table in the front window, and would

take the wire pliers there without much thought as

to their value as distinguished from a lineman's

tools. The one idea was to do quickly what he

wanted to do; and the same swift, almost headlong

trial of anything that comes to hand, while the fervor

of a new experiment is felt, has been noted at all

stages of the inventor's career. One is reminded of

Palissy's recklessness, when in his efforts to make the

enamel melt on his pottery he used the very furniture

of his home for firewood.



Mr. Edison remarks the fact that there was very

little difference between the telegraph of that time

and of to-day, except the general use of the old Morse

register with the dots and dashes recorded by indenting

paper strips that could be read and checked

later at leisure if necessary. He says: "The telegraph

men couldn't explain how it worked, and I

was always trying to get them to do so. I think they

couldn't. I remember the best explanation I got

was from an old Scotch line repairer employed by the

Montreal Telegraph Company, which operated the

railroad wires. He said that if you had a dog like

a dachshund, long enough to reach from Edinburgh

to London, if you pulled his tail in Edinburgh he would

bark in London. I could understand that, but I

never could get it through me what went through the

dog or over the wire." To-day Mr. Edison is just as

unable to solve the inner mystery of electrical

transmission. Nor is he alone. At the banquet given to

celebrate his jubilee in 1896 as professor at Glasgow

University, Lord Kelvin, the greatest physicist of our

time, admitted with tears in his eyes and the note of

tragedy in his voice, that when it came to explaining

the nature of electricity, he knew just as little as

when he had begun as a student, and felt almost as

though his life had been wasted while he tried to

grapple with the great mystery of physics.



Another episode of this period is curious in its

revelation of the tenacity with which Edison has

always held to some of his oldest possessions with a

sense of personal attachment. "While working at

Stratford Junction," he says, "I was told by one of

the freight conductors that in the freight-house at

Goodrich there were several boxes of old broken-up

batteries. I went there and found over eighty cells

of the well-known Grove nitric-acid battery. The

operator there, who was also agent, when asked by

me if I could have the electrodes of each cell, made

of sheet platinum, gave his permission readily, thinking

they were of tin. I removed them all, amounting

to several ounces. Platinum even in those days

was very expensive, costing several dollars an ounce,

and I owned only three small strips. I was overjoyed

at this acquisition, and those very strips and

the reworked scrap are used to this day in my laboratory

over forty years later."



It was at Stratford that Edison's inventiveness was

first displayed. The hours of work of a night operator

are usually from 7 P.M. to 7 A.M., and to insure attention

while on duty it is often provided that the

operator every hour, from 9 P.M. until relieved by the

day operator, shall send in the signal "6" to the

train dispatcher's office. Edison revelled in the

opportunity for study and experiment given him by his

long hours of freedom in the daytime, but needed

sleep, just as any healthy youth does. Confronted

by the necessity of sending in this watchman's signal

as evidence that he was awake and on duty, he constructed

a small wheel with notches on the rim, and

attached it to the clock in such a manner that the

night-watchman could start it when the line was

quiet, and at each hour the wheel revolved and sent

in accurately the dots required for "sixing." The

invention was a success, the device being, indeed,

similar to that of the modern district messenger box;

but it was soon noticed that, in spite of the regularity

of the report, "Sf" could not be raised even if a train

message were sent immediately after. Detection and

a reprimand came in due course, but were not taken

very seriously.



A serious occurrence that might have resulted in

accident drove him soon after from Canada, although

the youth could hardly be held to blame for it.

Edison says: "This night job just suited me, as I

could have the whole day to myself. I had the faculty

of sleeping in a chair any time for a few minutes at

a time. I taught the night-yardman my call, so I

could get half an hour's sleep now and then between

trains, and in case the station was called the watchman

would awaken me. One night I got an order

to hold a freight train, and I replied that I would.

I rushed out to find the signalman, but before I could

find him and get the signal set, the train ran past.

I ran to the telegraph office, and reported that I could

not hold her. The reply was: `Hell!' The train dispatcher,

on the strength of my message that I would

hold the train, had permitted another to leave the

last station in the opposite direction. There was

a lower station near the junction where the day

operator slept. I started for it on foot. The night

was dark, and I fell into a culvert and was knocked

senseless." Owing to the vigilance of the two engineers

on the locomotives, who saw each other approaching

on the straight single track, nothing more

dreadful happened than a summons to the thoughtless

operator to appear before the general manager at

Toronto. On reaching the manager's office, his trial

for neglect of duty was fortunately interrupted by

the call of two Englishmen; and while their conversation

proceeded, Edison slipped quietly out of the

room, hurried to the Grand Trunk freight depot,

found a conductor he knew taking out a freight train

for Sarnia, and was not happy until the ferry-boat

from Sarnia had landed him once more on the Michigan

shore. The Grand Trunk still owes Mr. Edison

the wages due him at the time he thus withdrew

from its service, but the claim has never been pressed.



The same winter of 1863-64, while at Port Huron,

Edison had a further opportunity of displaying his

ingenuity. An ice-jam had broken the light telegraph

cable laid in the bed of the river across to

Sarnia, and thus communication was interrupted.

The river is three-quarters of a mile wide, and could

not be crossed on foot; nor could the cable be repaired.

Edison at once suggested using the steam whistle of

the locomotive, and by manipulating the valve con-

versed the short and long outbursts of shrill sound

into the Morse code. An operator on the Sarnia shore

was quick enough to catch the significance of the

strange whistling, and messages were thus sent in

wireless fashion across the ice-floes in the river. It

is said that such signals were also interchanged by

military telegraphers during the war, and possibly

Edison may have heard of the practice; but be that

as it may, he certainly showed ingenuity and resource

in applying such a method to meet the necessity.

It is interesting to note that at this point the Grand

Trunk now has its St. Clair tunnel, through which the

trains are hauled under the river-bed by electric

locomotives.



Edison had now begun unconsciously the roaming

and drifting that took him during the next five years

all over the Middle States, and that might well have

wrecked the career of any one less persistent and

industrious. It was a period of his life corresponding

to the Wanderjahre of the German artisan, and

was an easy way of gratifying a taste for travel

without the risk of privation. To-day there is little

temptation to the telegrapher to go to distant parts

of the country on the chance that he may secure a

livelihood at the key. The ranks are well filled everywhere,

and of late years the telegraph as an art or

industry has shown relatively slight expansion, owing

chiefly to the development of telephony. Hence, if vacancies

occur, there are plenty of operators available,

and salaries have remained so low as to lead to one or

two formidable and costly strikes that unfortunately

took no account of the economic conditions of demand

and supply. But in the days of the Civil War there

was a great dearth of skilful manipulators of the key.

About fifteen hundred of the best operators in the

country were at the front on the Federal side alone,

and several hundred more had enlisted. This created

a serious scarcity, and a nomadic operator going to any

telegraphic centre would be sure to find a place open

waiting for him. At the close of the war a majority

of those who had been with the two opposed armies

remained at the key under more peaceful surroundings,

but the rapid development of the commercial

and railroad systems fostered a new demand, and

then for a time it seemed almost impossible to train

new operators fast enough. In a few years, however,

the telephone sprang into vigorous existence,

dating from 1876, drawing off some of the most

adventurous spirits from the telegraph field; and the

deterrent influence of the telephone on the telegraph

had made itself felt by 1890. The expiration of the

leading Bell telephone patents, five years later,

accentuated even more sharply the check that had

been put on telegraphy, as hundreds and thousands

of "independent" telephone companies were then

organized, throwing a vast network of toll lines over

Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and other States, and

affording cheap, instantaneous means of communication

without any necessity for the intervention of an

operator.



It will be seen that the times have changed radically

since Edison became a telegrapher, and that in

this respect a chapter of electrical history has been

definitely closed. There was a day when the art

offered a distinct career to all of its practitioners,

and young men of ambition and good family were

eager to begin even as messenger boys, and were

ready to undergo a severe ordeal of apprenticeship

with the belief that they could ultimately attain positions

of responsibility and profit. At the same time

operators have always been shrewd enough to regard

the telegraph as a stepping-stone to other careers

in life. A bright fellow entering the telegraph service

to-day finds the experience he may gain therein

valuable, but he soon realizes that there are not

enough good-paying official positions to "go around,"

so as to give each worthy man a chance after he has

mastered the essentials of the art. He feels, therefore,

that to remain at the key involves either stagnation

or deterioration, and that after, say, twenty-five years

of practice he will have lost ground as compared with

friends who started out in other occupations. The

craft of an operator, learned without much difficulty,

is very attractive to a youth, but a position at the

key is no place for a man of mature years. His services,

with rare exceptions, grow less valuable as he

advances in age and nervous strain breaks him down.

On the contrary, men engaged in other professions

find, as a rule, that they improve and advance with

experience, and that age brings larger rewards and

opportunities.



The list of well-known Americans who have been

graduates of the key is indeed an extraordinary one,

and there is no department of our national life in

which they have not distinguished themselves. The

contrast, in this respect, between them and their

European colleagues is highly significant. In Europe

the telegraph systems are all under government

management, the operators have strictly limited

spheres of promotion, and at the best the transition

from one kind of employment to another is not

made so easily as in the New World. But in the

United States we have seen Rufus Bullock become

Governor of Georgia, and Ezra Cornell Governor of

New York. Marshall Jewell was Postmaster-General

of President Grant's Cabinet, and Daniel Lamont was

Secretary of State in President Cleveland's. Gen.

T. T. Eckert, past-President of the Western Union

Telegraph Company, was Assistant Secretary of War

under President Lincoln; and Robert J. Wynne, afterward

a consul-general, served as Assistant Postmaster

General. A very large proportion of the presidents

and leading officials of the great railroad systems are

old telegraphers, including Messrs. W. C. Brown,

President of the New York Central Railroad, and

Marvin Hughitt, President of the Chicago & North

western Railroad. In industrial and financial life

there have been Theodore N. Vail, President of the

Bell telephone system; L. C. Weir, late President of

the Adams Express; A. B. Chandler, President of the

Postal Telegraph and Cable Company; Sir W. Van

Home, identified with Canadian development; Robert

C. Clowry, President of the Western Union Telegraph

Company; D. H. Bates, Manager of the Baltimore &

Ohio telegraph for Robert Garrett; and Andrew

Carnegie, the greatest ironmaster the world has ever

known, as well as its greatest philanthropist. In

journalism there have been leaders like Edward Rose-



water, founder of the Omaha Bee; W. J. Elverson, of

the Philadelphia Press; and Frank A. Munsey, publisher

of half a dozen big magazines. George Kennan

has achieved fame in literature, and Guy Carleton

and Harry de Souchet have been successful as dramatists.

These are but typical of hundreds of men

who could be named who have risen from work at the

key to become recognized leaders in differing spheres

of activity.



But roving has never been favorable to the formation

of steady habits. The young men who thus

floated about the country from one telegraph office

to another were often brilliant operators, noted for

speed in sending and receiving, but they were undisciplined,

were without the restraining influences of

home life, and were so highly paid for their work that

they could indulge freely in dissipation if inclined

that way. Subjected to nervous tension for hours

together at the key, many of them unfortunately

took to drink, and having ended one engagement in

a city by a debauch that closed the doors of the

office to them, would drift away to the nearest town,

and there securing work, would repeat the performance.

At one time, indeed, these men were so numerous

and so much in evidence as to constitute a type

that the public was disposed to accept as representative

of the telegraphic fraternity; but as the conditions

creating him ceased to exist, the "tramp

operator" also passed into history. It was, however,

among such characters that Edison was very largely

thrown in these early days of aimless drifting, to learn

something perhaps of their nonchalant philosophy of

life, sharing bed and board with them under all kinds

of adverse conditions, but always maintaining a stoic

abstemiousness, and never feeling other than a keen

regret at the waste of so much genuine ability and

kindliness on the part of those knights errant of the

key whose inevitable fate might so easily have been

his own.



Such a class or group of men can always be presented

by an individual type, and this is assuredly

best embodied in Milton F. Adams, one of Edison's

earliest and closest friends, to whom reference will

be made in later chapters, and whose life has been

so full of adventurous episodes that he might well be

regarded as the modern Gil Blas. That career is

certainly well worth the telling as "another story,"

to use the Kipling phrase. Of him Edison says:

"Adams was one of a class of operators never satisfied

to work at any place for any great length of

time. He had the `wanderlust.' After enjoying hospitality

in Boston in 1868-69, on the floor of my hall-

bedroom, which was a paradise for the entomologist,

while the boarding-house itself was run on the banting

system of flesh reduction, he came to me one day

and said: `Good-bye, Edison; I have got sixty cents,

and I am going to San Francisco.' And he did go.

How, I never knew personally. I learned afterward

that he got a job there, and then within a week they

had a telegraphers' strike. He got a big torch and

sold patent medicine on the streets at night to support

the strikers. Then he went to Peru as partner

of a man who had a grizzly bear which they proposed

entering against a bull in the bull-ring in that city.

The grizzly was killed in five minutes, and so the

scheme died. Then Adams crossed the Andes, and

started a market-report bureau in Buenos Ayres.

This didn't pay, so he started a restaurant in Pernambuco,

Brazil. There he did very well, but something

went wrong (as it always does to a nomad), so

he went to the Transvaal, and ran a panorama called

`Paradise Lost' in the Kaffir kraals. This didn't

pay, and he became the editor of a newspaper; then

went to England to raise money for a railroad in Cape

Colony. Next I heard of him in New York, having

just arrived from Bogota, United States of Colombia,

with a power of attorney and $2000 from a native

of that republic, who had applied for a patent for

tightening a belt to prevent it from slipping on a

pulley--a device which he thought a new and great

invention, but which was in use ever since machinery

was invented. I gave Adams, then, a position as salesman

for electrical apparatus. This he soon got tired

of, and I lost sight of him." Adams, in speaking of

this episode, says that when he asked for transportation

expenses to St. Louis, Edison pulled out of his

pocket a ferry ticket to Hoboken, and said to his

associates: "I'll give him that, and he'll get there

all right." This was in the early days of electric

lighting; but down to the present moment the peregrinations

of this versatile genius of the key have

never ceased in one hemisphere or the other, so that

as Mr. Adams himself remarked to the authors in

April, 1908: "The life has been somewhat variegated,

but never dull."



The fact remains also that throughout this period

Edison, while himself a very Ishmael, never ceased

to study, explore, experiment. Referring to this beginning

of his career, he mentions a curious fact that

throws light on his ceaseless application. "After I

became a telegraph operator," he says, "I practiced

for a long time to become a rapid reader of print, and

got so expert I could sense the meaning of a whole

line at once. This faculty, I believe, should be taught

in schools, as it appears to be easily acquired. Then

one can read two or three books in a day, whereas if

each word at a time only is sensed, reading is laborious."

