




CHAPTER XI



THE INVENTION OF THE INCANDESCENT LAMP



IT is possible to imagine a time to come when the

hours of work and rest will once more be regulated

by the sun. But the course of civilization has been

marked by an artificial lengthening of the day, and by a

constant striving after more perfect means of illumination.

Why mankind should sleep through several hours

of sunlight in the morning, and stay awake through

a needless time in the evening, can probably only

be attributed to total depravity. It is certainly a

most stupid, expensive, and harmful habit. In no

one thing has man shown greater fertility of invention

than in lighting; to nothing does he cling more

tenaciously than to his devices for furnishing light.

Electricity to-day reigns supreme in the field of

illumination, but every other kind of artificial light

that has ever been known is still in use somewhere.

Toward its light-bringers the race has assumed an

attitude of veneration, though it has forgotten, if it

ever heard, the names of those who first brightened

its gloom and dissipated its darkness. If the tallow

candle, hitherto unknown, were now invented, its

creator would be hailed as one of the greatest

benefactors of the present age.



Up to the close of the eighteenth century, the means

of house and street illumination were of two generic

kinds--grease and oil; but then came a swift and

revolutionary change in the adoption of gas. The

ideas and methods of Murdoch and Lebon soon took

definite shape, and "coal smoke" was piped from its

place of origin to distant points of consumption. As

early as 1804, the first company ever organized for

gas lighting was formed in London, one side of Pall

Mall being lit up by the enthusiastic pioneer, Winsor,

in 1807. Equal activity was shown in America, and

Baltimore began the practice of gas lighting in 1816.

It is true that there were explosions, and distinguished

men like Davy and Watt opined that the illuminant

was too dangerous; but the "spirit of coal" had

demonstrated its usefulness convincingly, and a

commercial development began, which, for extent

and rapidity, was not inferior to that marking the

concurrent adoption of steam in industry and transportation.



Meantime the wax candle and the Argand oil lamp

held their own bravely. The whaling fleets, long after

gas came into use, were one of the greatest sources

of our national wealth. To New Bedford, Massachusetts,

alone, some three or four hundred ships

brought their whale and sperm oil, spermaceti, and

whalebone; and at one time that port was accounted

the richest city in the United States in proportion

to its population. The ship-owners and refiners of

that whaling metropolis were slow to believe that

their monopoly could ever be threatened by newer

sources of illumination; but gas had become available

in the cities, and coal-oil and petroleum were now

added to the list of illuminating materials. The

American whaling fleet, which at the time of Edison's

birth mustered over seven hundred sail, had dwindled

probably to a bare tenth when he took up the problem

of illumination; and the competition of oil from

the ground with oil from the sea, and with coal-gas,

had made the artificial production of light cheaper

than ever before, when up to the middle of the century

it had remained one of the heaviest items of

domestic expense. Moreover, just about the time

that Edison took up incandescent lighting, water-gas

was being introduced on a large scale as a commercial

illuminant that could be produced at a much lower

cost than coal-gas.



Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century

the search for a practical electric light was almost

wholly in the direction of employing methods analogous

to those already familiar; in other words, obtaining

the illumination from the actual consumption of

the light-giving material. In the third quarter of

the century these methods were brought to practicality,

but all may be referred back to the brilliant

demonstrations of Sir Humphry Davy at the Royal

Institution, circa 1809-10, when, with the current

from a battery of two thousand cells, he produced an

intense voltaic arc between the points of consuming

sticks of charcoal. For more than thirty years the

arc light remained an expensive laboratory experiment;

but the coming of the dynamo placed that

illuminant on a commercial basis. The mere fact

that electrical energy from the least expensive chemical

battery using up zinc and acids costs twenty

times as much as that from a dynamo--driven by

steam-engine--is in itself enough to explain why so

many of the electric arts lingered in embryo after

their fundamental principles had been discovered.

Here is seen also further proof of the great truth

that one invention often waits for another.



From 1850 onward the improvements in both the

arc lamp and the dynamo were rapid; and under the

superintendence of the great Faraday, in 1858, protecting

beams of intense electric light from the voltaic

arc were shed over the waters of the Straits of Dover

from the beacons of South Foreland and Dungeness.

By 1878 the arc-lighting industry had sprung into

existence in so promising a manner as to engender

an extraordinary fever and furor of speculation. At

the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition of 1876,

Wallace-Farmer dynamos built at Ansonia, Connecticut,

were shown, with the current from which arc

lamps were there put in actual service. A year or

two later the work of Charles F. Brush and Edward

Weston laid the deep foundation of modern arc lighting

in America, securing as well substantial recognition

abroad.



Thus the new era had been ushered in, but it was

based altogether on the consumption of some material

--carbon--in a lamp open to the air. Every

lamp the world had ever known did this, in one way

or another. Edison himself began at that point,

and his note-books show that he made various experiments

with this type of lamp at a very early stage.

Indeed, his experiments had led him so far as to

anticipate in 1875 what are now known as "flaming

arcs," the exceedingly bright and generally orange

or rose-colored lights which have been introduced

within the last few years, and are now so frequently

seen in streets and public places. While the arcs

with plain carbons are bluish-white, those with carbons

containing calcium fluoride have a notable

golden glow.



He was convinced, however, that the greatest field

of lighting lay in the illumination of houses and other

comparatively enclosed areas, to replace the ordinary

gas light, rather than in the illumination of streets

and other outdoor places by lights of great volume

and brilliancy. Dismissing from his mind quickly

the commercial impossibility of using arc lights for

general indoor illumination, he arrived at the conclusion

that an electric lamp giving light by incandescence

was the solution of the problem.



Edison was familiar with the numerous but

impracticable and commercially unsuccessful efforts

that had been previously made by other inventors

and investigators to produce electric light by incandescence,

and at the time that he began his experiments,

in 1877, almost the whole scientific world

had pronounced such an idea as impossible of fulfilment.

The leading electricians, physicists, and experts

of the period had been studying the subject

for more than a quarter of a century, and with but

one known exception had proven mathematically and

by close reasoning that the "Subdivision of the

Electric Light," as it was then termed, was practically

beyond attainment. Opinions of this nature

have ever been but a stimulus to Edison when he

has given deep thought to a subject, and has become

impressed with strong convictions of possibility, and

in this particular case he was satisfied that the subdivision

of the electric light--or, more correctly, the

subdivision of the electric current--was not only

possible but entirely practicable.



It will have been perceived from the foregoing

chapters that from the time of boyhood, when he

first began to rub against the world, his commercial

instincts were alert and predominated in almost all

of the enterprises that he set in motion. This

characteristic trait had grown stronger as he matured,

having received, as it did, fresh impetus and strength

from his one lapse in the case of his first patented

invention, the vote-recorder. The lesson he then

learned was to devote his inventive faculties only to

things for which there was a real, genuine demand,

and that would subserve the actual necessities of

humanity; and it was probably a fortunate circumstance

that this lesson was learned at the outset of

his career as an inventor. He has never assumed to

be a philosopher or "pure scientist."



In order that the reader may grasp an adequate

idea of the magnitude and importance of Edison's

invention of the incandescent lamp, it will be necessary

to review briefly the "state of the art" at the

time he began his experiments on that line. After

the invention of the voltaic battery, early in the last

century, experiments were made which determined

that heat could be produced by the passage of the

electric current through wires of platinum and other

metals, and through pieces of carbon, as noted al-

ready, and it was, of course, also observed that if

sufficient current were passed through these conductors

they could be brought from the lower stage

of redness up to the brilliant white heat of incandescence.

As early as 1845 the results of these experiments

were taken advantage of when Starr, a

talented American who died at the early age of

twenty-five, suggested, in his English patent of that

year, two forms of small incandescent electric lamps,

one having a burner made from platinum foil placed

under a glass cover without excluding the air; and

the other composed of a thin plate or pencil of carbon

enclosed in a Torricellian vacuum. These suggestions

of young Starr were followed by many other experimenters,

whose improvements consisted principally

in devices to increase the compactness and portability

of the lamp, in the sealing of the lamp chamber

to prevent the admission of air, and in means

for renewing the carbon burner when it had been consumed.

Thus Roberts, in 1852, proposed to cement

the neck of the glass globe into a metallic cup, and

to provide it with a tube or stop-cock for exhaustion

by means of a hand-pump. Lodyguine, Konn, Kosloff,

and Khotinsky, between 1872 and 1877, proposed

various ingenious devices for perfecting the

joint between the metal base and the glass globe, and

also provided their lamps with several short carbon

pencils, which were automatically brought into circuit

successively as the pencils were consumed. In

1876 or 1877, Bouliguine proposed the employment

of a long carbon pencil, a short section only of

which was in circuit at any one time and formed the

burner, the lamp being provided with a mechanism

for automatically pushing other sections of the pencil

into position between the contacts to renew the

burner. Sawyer and Man proposed, in 1878, to make

the bottom plate of glass instead of metal, and

provided ingenious arrangements for charging the

lamp chamber with an atmosphere of pure nitrogen

gas which does not support combustion.



These lamps and many others of similar character,

ingenious as they were, failed to become of any commercial

value, due, among other things, to the brief

life of the carbon burner. Even under the best conditions

it was found that the carbon members were

subject to a rapid disintegration or evaporation,

which experimenters assumed was due to the disrupting

action of the electric current; and hence the

conclusion that carbon contained in itself the elements

of its own destruction, and was not a suitable

material for the burner of an incandescent lamp.

On the other hand, platinum, although found to be

the best of all materials for the purpose, aside from

its great expense, and not combining with oxygen at

high temperatures as does carbon, required to be

brought so near the melting-point in order to give

light, that a very slight increase in the temperature

resulted in its destruction. It was assumed that the

difficulty lay in the material of the burner itself, and

not in its environment.



It was not realized up to such a comparatively

recent date as 1879 that the solution of the great

problem of subdivision of the electric current would

not, however, be found merely in the production of

a durable incandescent electric lamp--even if any of

the lamps above referred to had fulfilled that requirement.

The other principal features necessary

to subdivide the electric current successfully were:

the burning of an indefinite number of lights on the

same circuit; each light to give a useful and economical

degree of illumination; and each light to be independent

of all the others in regard to its operation

and extinguishment.



The opinions of scientific men of the period on the

subject are well represented by the two following

extracts--the first, from a lecture at the Royal

United Service Institution, about February, 1879,

by Mr. (Sir) W. H. Preece, one of the most eminent

electricians in England, who, after discussing the

question mathematically, said: "Hence the sub-division

of the light is an absolute ignis fatuus." The

other extract is from a book written by Paget Higgs,

LL.D., D.Sc., published in London in 1879, in which

he says: "Much nonsense has been talked in relation

to this subject. Some inventors have claimed the

power to `indefinitely divide' the electric current, not

knowing or forgetting that such a statement is incompatible

with the well-proven law of conservation

of energy."



"Some inventors," in the last sentence just quoted,

probably--indeed, we think undoubtedly--refers to

Edison, whose earlier work in electric lighting (1878)

had been announced in this country and abroad, and

who had then stated boldly his conviction of the

practicability of the subdivision of the electrical current.

The above extracts are good illustrations,

however, of scientific opinions up to the end of 1879,

when Mr. Edison's epoch-making invention rendered

them entirely untenable. The eminent scientist,

John Tyndall, while not sharing these precise views,

at least as late as January 17, 1879, delivered a

lecture before the Royal Institution on "The

Electric Light," when, after pointing out the

development of the art up to Edison's work, and

showing the apparent hopelessness of the problem, he

said: "Knowing something of the intricacy of the

practical problem, I should certainly prefer seeing it

in Edison's hands to having it in mine."



The reader may have deemed this sketch of the

state of the art to be a considerable digression; but

it is certainly due to the subject to present the facts

in such a manner as to show that this great invention

was neither the result of improving some process or

device that was known or existing at the time, nor

due to any unforeseen lucky chance, nor the accidental

result of other experiments. On the contrary, it was

the legitimate outcome of a series of exhaustive

experiments founded upon logical and original reasoning

in a mind that had the courage and hardihood to

set at naught the confirmed opinions of the world,

voiced by those generally acknowledged to be the

best exponents of the art--experiments carried on

amid a storm of jeers and derision, almost as

contemptuous as if the search were for the discovery of

perpetual motion. In this we see the man foreshadowed

by the boy who, when he obtained his books

on chemistry or physics, did not accept any statement

of fact or experiment therein, but worked out every

one of them himself to ascertain whether or not they

were true.



Although this brings the reader up to the year

1879, one must turn back two years and accompany

Edison in his first attack on the electric-light problem.

In 1877 he sold his telephone invention (the carbon

transmitter) to the Western Union Telegraph Company,

which had previously come into possession also

of his quadruplex inventions, as already related. He

was still busily engaged on the telephone, on acoustic

electrical transmission, sextuplex telegraphs, duplex

telegraphs, miscellaneous carbon articles, and other

inventions of a minor nature. During the whole of

the previous year and until late in the summer of

1877, he had been working with characteristic energy

and enthusiasm on the telephone; and, in developing

this invention to a successful issue, had preferred the

use of carbon and had employed it in numerous

forms, especially in the form of carbonized paper.



Eighteen hundred and seventy-seven in Edison's

laboratory was a veritable carbon year, for it was

carbon in some shape or form for interpolation in

electric circuits of various kinds that occupied the

thoughts of the whole force from morning to night.

It is not surprising, therefore, that in September of

that year, when Edison turned his thoughts actively

toward electric lighting by incandescence, his early

experiments should be in the line of carbon as an

illuminant. His originality of method was displayed

at the very outset, for one of the first experiments

was the bringing to incandescence of a strip of carbon

in the open air to ascertain merely how much current

was required. This conductor was a strip of carbonized

paper about an inch long, one-sixteenth of an

inch broad, and six or seven one-thousandths of an

inch thick, the ends of which were secured to clamps

that formed the poles of a battery. The carbon

was lighted up to incandescence, and, of course,

oxidized and disintegrated immediately. Within a

few days this was followed by experiments with the

same kind of carbon, but in vacuo by means of a

hand-worked air-pump. This time the carbon strip

burned at incandescence for about eight minutes.

Various expedients to prevent oxidization were tried,

such, for instance, as coating the carbon with powdered

glass, which in melting would protect the

carbon from the atmosphere, but without successful

results.



Edison was inclined to concur in the prevailing

opinion as to the easy destructibility of carbon, but,

without actually settling the point in his mind, he

laid aside temporarily this line of experiment and

entered a new field. He had made previously some

trials of platinum wire as an incandescent burner

for a lamp, but left it for a time in favor of carbon.

He now turned to the use of almost infusible metals--

such as boron, ruthenium, chromium, etc.--as separators

or tiny bridges between two carbon points,

the current acting so as to bring these separators to

a high degree of incandescence, at which point they

would emit a brilliant light. He also placed some of

these refractory metals directly in the circuit, bringing

them to incandescence, and used silicon in powdered

form in glass tubes placed in the electric circuit. His

notes include the use of powdered silicon mixed with

lime or other very infusible non-conductors or semi-

conductors. Edison's conclusions on these substances

were that, while in some respects they were

within the bounds of possibility for the subdivision

of the electric current, they did not reach the ideal

that he had in mind for commercial results.



Edison's systematized attacks on the problem were

two in number, the first of which we have just related,

which began in September, 1877, and continued

until about January, 1878. Contemporaneously,

he and his force of men were very busily engaged

day and night on other important enterprises

and inventions. Among the latter, the phonograph

may be specially mentioned, as it was invented in

the late fall of 1877. From that time until July,

1878, his time and attention day and night were almost

completely absorbed by the excitement caused

by the invention and exhibition of the machine. In

July, feeling entitled to a brief vacation after several

years of continuous labor, Edison went with the

expedition to Wyoming to observe an eclipse of the

sun, and incidentally to test his tasimeter, a delicate

instrument devised by him for measuring heat transmitted

through immense distances of space. His trip

has been already described. He was absent about

two months. Coming home rested and refreshed,

Mr. Edison says: "After my return from the trip to

observe the eclipse of the sun, I went with Professor

Barker, Professor of Physics in the University of

Pennsylvania, and Doctor Chandler, Professor of

Chemistry in Columbia College, to see Mr. Wallace,

a large manufacturer of brass in Ansonia, Connecticut.

Wallace at this time was experimenting on

series arc lighting. Just at that time I wanted to

take up something new, and Professor Barker suggested

that I go to work and see if I could subdivide

the electric light so it could be got in small units like

gas. This was not a new suggestion, because I had

made a number of experiments on electric lighting a

year before this. They had been laid aside for the

phonograph. I determined to take up the search

again and continue it. On my return home I started

my usual course of collecting every kind of data

about gas; bought all the transactions of the gas-

engineering societies, etc., all the back volumes of

gas journals, etc. Having obtained all the data, and

investigated gas-jet distribution in New York by

actual observations, I made up my mind that the

problem of the subdivision of the electric current

could be solved and made commercial." About the

end of August, 1878, he began his second organized

attack on the subdivision of the current, which was

steadily maintained until he achieved signal victory

a year and two months later.



The date of this interesting visit to Ansonia is

fixed by an inscription made by Edison on a glass

goblet which he used. The legend in diamond

scratches runs: "Thomas A. Edison, September 8,

1878, made under the electric light." Other members

of the party left similar memorials, which under the

circumstances have come to be greatly prized. A

number of experiments were witnessed in arc lighting,

and Edison secured a small Wallace-Farmer dynamo

for his own work, as well as a set of Wallace arc

lamps for lighting the Menlo Park laboratory. Before

leaving Ansonia, Edison remarked, significantly:

"Wallace, I believe I can beat you making electric

lights. I don't think you are working in the right

direction." Another date which shows how promptly

the work was resumed is October 14, 1878, when Edison

filed an application for his first lighting patent:

"Improvement in Electric Lights." In after years,

discussing the work of Wallace, who was not only a great

pioneer electrical manufacturer, but one of the founders

of the wire-drawing and brass-working industry,

Edison said: "Wallace was one of the earliest pioneers

in electrical matters in this country. He has

done a great deal of good work, for which others have

received the credit; and the work which he did in

the early days of electric lighting others have benefited

by largely, and he has been crowded to one side

and forgotten." Associated in all this work with

Wallace at Ansonia was Prof. Moses G. Farmer,

famous for the introduction of the fire-alarm system;

as the discoverer of the self-exciting principle of the

modern dynamo; as a pioneer experimenter in the

electric-railway field; as a telegraph engineer, and

as a lecturer on mines and explosives to naval classes

at Newport. During 1858, Farmer, who, like Edison,

was a ceaseless investigator, had made a series of

studies upon the production of light by electricity,

and had even invented an automatic regulator by

which a number of platinum lamps in multiple arc

could be kept at uniform voltage for any length of

time. In July, 1859, he lit up one of the rooms of

his house at Salem, Massachusetts, every evening

with such lamps, using in them small pieces of platinum

and iridium wire, which were made to incandesce

by means of current from primary batteries.

Farmer was not one of the party that memorable day

in September, but his work was known through his

intimate connection with Wallace, and there is no

doubt that reference was made to it. Such work had

not led very far, the "lamps" were hopelessly short-

lived, and everything was obviously experimental;

but it was all helpful and suggestive to one whose

open mind refused no hint from any quarter.



At the commencement of his new attempts, Edison

returned to his experiments with carbon as an

incandescent burner for a lamp, and made a very large

number of trials, all in vacuo. Not only were the

ordinary strip paper carbons tried again, but tissue-

paper coated with tar and lampblack was rolled

into thin sticks, like knitting-needles, carbonized and

raised to incandescence in vacuo. Edison also tried

hard carbon, wood carbons, and almost every

conceivable variety of paper carbon in like manner.

With the best vacuum that he could then get by

means of the ordinary air-pump, the carbons would

last, at the most, only from ten to fifteen minutes in

a state of incandescence. Such results were evidently

not of commercial value.



Edison then turned his attention in other directions.

In his earliest consideration of the problem

of subdividing the electric current, he had decided

that the only possible solution lay in the employment

of a lamp whose incandescing body should have a

high resistance combined with a small radiating surface,

and be capable of being used in what is called

"multiple arc," so that each unit, or lamp, could be

turned on or off without interfering with any other

unit or lamp. No other arrangement could possibly

be considered as commercially practicable.



The full significance of the three last preceding

sentences will not be obvious to laymen, as undoubtedly

many of the readers of this book may be; and now

being on the threshold of the series of Edison's experiments

that led up to the basic invention, we interpolate

a brief explanation, in order that the reader

may comprehend the logical reasoning and work that

in this case produced such far-reaching results.



If we consider a simple circuit in which a current

is flowing, and include in the circuit a carbon horseshoe-like

conductor which it is desired to bring to

incandescence by the heat generated by the current

passing through it, it is first evident that the resistance

offered to the current by the wires themselves

must be less than that offered by the burner, because,

otherwise current would be wasted as heat in the conducting

wires. At the very foundation of the electric-

lighting art is the essentially commercial consideration

that one cannot spend very much for conductors, and

Edison determined that, in order to use wires of a

practicable size, the voltage of the current (i.e., its

pressure or the characteristic that overcomes resistance

to its flow) should be one hundred and ten volts,

which since its adoption has been the standard. To

use a lower voltage or pressure, while making the solution

of the lighting problem a simple one as we shall

see, would make it necessary to increase the size of

the conducting wires to a prohibitive extent. To

increase the voltage or pressure materially, while

permitting some saving in the cost of conductors, would

enormously increase the difficulties of making a

sufficiently high resistance conductor to secure light by

incandescence. This apparently remote consideration

--weight of copper used--was really the commercial

key to the problem, just as the incandescent

burner was the scientific key to that problem. Before

Edison's invention incandescent lamps had been

suggested as a possibility, but they were provided

with carbon rods or strips of relatively low resistance,

and to bring these to incandescence required a current

of low pressure, because a current of high voltage

would pass through them so readily as not to generate

heat; and to carry a current of low pressure through

wires without loss would require wires of enormous

size.[8] Having a current of relatively high pressure

to contend with, it was necessary to provide a carbon

burner which, as compared with what had previously

been suggested, should have a very great resistance.

Carbon as a material, determined after patient search,

apparently offered the greatest hope, but even with

this substance the necessary high resistance could be

obtained only by making the burner of extremely

small cross-section, thereby also reducing its radiating

surface. Therefore, the crucial point was the

production of a hair-like carbon filament, with a

relatively great resistance and small radiating surface,

capable of withstanding mechanical shock, and

susceptible of being maintained at a temperature of

over two thousand degrees for a thousand hours or

more before breaking. And this filamentary conductor

required to be supported in a vacuum chamber

so perfectly formed and constructed that during all

those hours, and subjected as it is to varying temperatures,

not a particle of air should enter to disintegrate

the filament. And not only so, but the

lamp after its design must not be a mere laboratory

possibility, but a practical commercial article capable

of being manufactured at low cost and in large

quantities. A statement of what had to be done in

those days of actual as well as scientific electrical

darkness is quite sufficient to explain Tyndall's attitude

of mind in preferring that the problem should

be in Edison's hands rather than in his own. To

say that the solution of the problem lay merely in

reducing the size of the carbon burner to a mere hair,

is to state a half-truth only; but who, we ask, would

have had the temerity even to suggest that such an

attenuated body could be maintained at a white heat,

without disintegration, for a thousand hours? The solution

consisted not only in that, but in the enormous

mass of patiently worked-out details--the manufacture

of the filaments, their uniform carbonization,

making the globes, producing a perfect vacuum, and

countless other factors, the omission of any one of

which would probably have resulted eventually in

failure.





[8] As a practical illustration of these facts it was calculated by

Professor Barker, of the University of Pennsylvania (after Edison

had invented the incandescent lamp), that if it should cost $100,000

for copper conductors to supply current to Edison lamps in

a given area, it would cost about $200,000,000 for copper conductors

for lighting the same area by lamps of the earlier experimenters

--such, for instance, as the lamp invented by Konn in 1875. This

enormous difference would be accounted for by the fact that

Edison's lamp was one having a high resistance and relatively

small radiating surface, while Konn's lamp was one having a very

low resistance and large radiating surface.







Continuing the digression one step farther in order

to explain the term "multiple arc," it may be stated

that there are two principal systems

of distributing electric current, one

termed "series," and the other

"multiple arc." The two are

illustrated, diagrammatically,

side by side, the

arrows indicating flow of

current. The series system,

it will be seen, presents

one continuous path

for the current. The current

for the last lamp

must pass through the

first and all the intermediate

lamps. Hence, if

any one light goes out,

the continuity of the path

is broken, current cannot

flow, and all the lamps

are extinguished unless a

loop or by-path is provided. It is quite

obvious that such a system would be

commercially impracticable where small

units, similar to gas jets, were employed. On the other

hand, in the multiple-arc system, current may be considered

as flowing in two parallel conductors like the

vertical sides of a ladder, the ends of which never

come together. Each lamp is placed in a separate

circuit across these two conductors, like a rung in

the ladder, thus making a separate and independent

path for the current in each case. Hence, if

a lamp goes out, only that individual subdivision, or

ladder step, is affected; just that one particular path

for the current is interrupted, but none of the other

lamps is interfered with. They remain lighted, each

one independent of the other. The reader will quite

readily understand, therefore, that a multiple-arc system

is the only one practically commercial where

electric light is to be used in small units like those

of gas or oil.



Such was the nature of the problem that confronted

Edison at the outset. There was nothing in the

whole world that in any way approximated a solution,

although the most brilliant minds in the electrical

art had been assiduously working on the subject

for a quarter of a century preceding. As already seen,

he came early to the conclusion that the only solution

lay in the use of a lamp of high resistance and

small radiating surface, and, with characteristic fervor

and energy, he attacked the problem from this

standpoint, having absolute faith in a successful outcome.

The mere fact that even with the successful

production of the electric lamp the assault on the

complete problem of commercial lighting would hardly

be begun did not deter him in the slightest. To

one of Edison's enthusiastic self-confidence the long

vista of difficulties ahead--we say it in all sincerity--

must have been alluring.



After having devoted several months to experimental

trials of carbon, at the end of 1878, as already

detailed, he turned his attention to the platinum

group of metals and began a series of experiments in

which he used chiefly platinum wire and iridium wire,

and alloys of refractory metals in the form of wire burners

for incandescent lamps. These metals have very

high fusing-points, and were found to last longer than

the carbon strips previously used when heated up to

incandescence by the electric current, although under

such conditions as were then possible they were

melted by excess of current after they had been

lighted a comparatively short time, either in the

open air or in such a vacuum as could be obtained

by means of the ordinary air-pump.



Nevertheless, Edison continued along this line of

experiment with unremitting vigor, making improvement

after improvement, until about April, 1879, he

devised a means whereby platinum wire of a given

length, which would melt in the open air when giving

a light equal to four candles, would emit a light of

twenty-five candle-power without fusion. This was

accomplished by introducing the platinum wire into

an all-glass globe, completely sealed and highly

exhausted of air, and passing a current through the

platinum wire while the vacuum was being made. In

this, which was a new and radical invention, we see

the first step toward the modern incandescent lamp.

The knowledge thus obtained that current passing

through the platinum during exhaustion would drive

out occluded gases (i.e., gases mechanically held in

or upon the metal), and increase the infusibility of

the platinum, led him to aim at securing greater perfection

in the vacuum, on the theory that the higher

the vacuum obtained, the higher would be the infusibility

of the platinum burner. And this fact also

was of the greatest importance in making successful

the final use of carbon, because without the subjection

of the carbon to the heating effect of current during

the formation of the vacuum, the presence of occluded

gases would have been a fatal obstacle.



Continuing these experiments with most fervent

zeal, taking no account of the passage of time, with

an utter disregard for meals, and but scanty hours

of sleep snatched reluctantly at odd periods of the

day or night, Edison kept his laboratory going without

cessation. A great variety of lamps was made

of the platinum-iridium type, mostly with thermal

devices to regulate the temperature of the burner and

prevent its being melted by an excess of current.

The study of apparatus for obtaining more perfect

vacua was unceasingly carried on, for Edison realized

that in this there lay a potent factor of ultimate

success. About August he had obtained a pump that

would produce a vacuum up to about the one-hundred-

thousandth part of an atmosphere, and some

time during the next month, or beginning of October,

had obtained one that would produce a vacuum up

to the one-millionth part of an atmosphere. It must

be remembered that the conditions necessary for

MAINTAINING this high vacuum were only made possible

by his invention of the one-piece all-glass globe,

in which all the joints were hermetically sealed

during its manufacture into a lamp, whereby a high

vacuum could be retained continuously for any

length of time.



In obtaining this perfection of vacuum apparatus,

Edison realized that he was approaching much nearer

to a solution of the problem. In his experiments with

the platinum-iridium lamps, he had been working all

the time toward the proposition of high resistance

and small radiating surface, until he had made a

lamp having thirty feet of fine platinum wire wound

upon a small bobbin of infusible material; but the

desired economy, simplicity, and durability were not

obtained in this manner, although at all times the

burner was maintained at a critically high temperature.

After attaining a high degree of perfection

with these lamps, he recognized their impracticable

character, and his mind reverted to the opinion he

had formed in his early experiments two years before

--viz., that carbon had the requisite resistance to

permit a very simple conductor to accomplish the

object if it could be used in the form of a hair-like

"filament," provided the filament itself could be

made sufficiently homogeneous. As we have already

seen, he could not use carbon successfully in his

earlier experiments, for the strips of carbon he then

employed, although they were much larger than

"filaments," would not stand, but were consumed in

a few minutes under the imperfect conditions then

at his command.



Now, however, that he had found means for obtaining

and maintaining high vacua, Edison immediately

went back to carbon, which from the first he

had conceived of as the ideal substance for a burner.

His next step proved conclusively the correctness of

his old deductions. On October 21, 1879, after many

patient trials, he carbonized a piece of cotton sewing-

thread bent into a loop or horseshoe form, and had it

sealed into a glass globe from which he exhausted the air

until a vacuum up to one-millionth of an atmosphere

was produced. This lamp, when put on the circuit,

lighted up brightly to incandescence and maintained

its integrity for over forty hours, and lo! the practical

incandescent lamp was born. The impossible, so

called, had been attained; subdivision of the electric-

light current was made practicable; the goal had

been reached; and one of the greatest inventions of

the century was completed. Up to this time Edison

had spent over $40,000 in his electric-light experiments,

but the results far more than justified the expenditure,

for with this lamp he made the discovery

that the FILAMENT of carbon, under the conditions of

high vacuum, was commercially stable and would

stand high temperatures without the disintegration

and oxidation that took place in all previous attempts

that he knew of for making an incandescent

burner out of carbon. Besides, this lamp possessed

the characteristics of high resistance and small radiating

surface, permitting economy in the outlay for

conductors, and requiring only a small current for

each unit of light--conditions that were absolutely

necessary of fulfilment in order to accomplish commercially

the subdivision of the electric-light current.



This slender, fragile, tenuous thread of brittle carbon,

glowing steadily and continuously with a soft

light agreeable to the eyes, was the tiny key that

opened the door to a world revolutionized in its interior

illumination. It was a triumphant vindication

of Edison's reasoning powers, his clear perceptions,

his insight into possibilities, and his inventive faculty,

all of which had already been productive of so many

startling, practical, and epoch-making inventions.

And now he had stepped over the threshold of a new

art which has since become so world-wide in its application

as to be an integral part of modern human

experience.[9]





[9] The following extract from Walker on Patents (4th edition)

will probably be of interest to the reader:



"Sec. 31a. A meritorious exception, to the rule of the last

section, is involved in the adjudicated validity of the Edison

incandescent-light patent. The carbon filament, which constitutes

the only new part of the combination of the second

claim of that patent, differs from the earlier carbon burners of

Sawyer and Man, only in having a diameter of one-sixty-fourth

of an inch or less, whereas the burners of Sawyer and Man had a

diameter of one-thirty-second of an inch or more. But that reduction

of one-half in diameter increased the resistance of the

burner FOURFOLD, and reduced its radiating surface TWOFOLD, and

thus increased eightfold, its ratio of resistance to radiating surface.

That eightfold increase of proportion enabled the resistance

of the conductor of electricity from the generator to

the burner to be increased eightfold, without any increase of

percentage of loss of energy in that conductor, or decrease of

percentage of development of heat in the burner; and thus enabled

the area of the cross-section of that conductor to be reduced

eightfold, and thus to be made with one-eighth of the amount of

copper or other metal, which would be required if the reduction

of diameter of the burner from one-thirty-second to one-sixty-

fourth of an inch had not been made. And that great reduction

in the size and cost of conductors, involved also a great difference

in the composition of the electric energy employed in the system;

that difference consisting in generating the necessary amount of

electrical energy with comparatively high electromotive force,

and comparatively low current, instead of contrariwise. For this

reason, the use of carbon filaments, one-sixty-fourth of an inch in

diameter or less, instead of carbon burners one-thirty-second of

an inch in diameter or more, not only worked an enormous economy

in conductors, but also necessitated a great change in generators,

and did both according to a philosophy, which Edison

was the first to know, and which is stated in this paragraph in its

simplest form and aspect, and which lies at the foundation of the

incandescent electric lighting of the world."





No sooner had the truth of this new principle been

established than the work to establish it firmly and

commercially was carried on more assiduously than

ever. The next immediate step was a further

investigation of the possibilities of improving the

quality of the carbon filament. Edison had previously

made a vast number of experiments with carbonized

paper for various electrical purposes, with

such good results that he once more turned to it and

now made fine filament-like loops of this material

which were put into other lamps. These proved

even more successful (commercially considered) than

the carbonized thread--so much so that after a number

of such lamps had been made and put through

severe tests, the manufacture of lamps from these

paper carbons was begun and carried on continuously.

This necessitated first the devising and making of a

large number of special tools for cutting the carbon

filaments and for making and putting together the

various parts of the lamps. Meantime, great excitement

had been caused in this country and in Europe

by the announcement of Edison's success. In the

Old World, scientists generally still declared the

impossibility of subdividing the electric-light current,

and in the public press Mr. Edison was denounced as

a dreamer. Other names of a less complimentary

nature were applied to him, even though his lamp

were actually in use, and the principle of commercial

incandescent lighting had been established.



Between October 21, 1879, and December 21, 1879,

some hundreds of these paper-carbon lamps had been

made and put into actual use, not only in the laboratory,

but in the streets and several residences at

Menlo Park, New Jersey, causing great excitement

and bringing many visitors from far and near. On

the latter date a full-page article appeared in the

New York Herald which so intensified the excited

feeling that Mr. Edison deemed it advisable to make

a public exhibition. On New Year's Eve, 1879,

special trains were run to Menlo Park by the Pennsylvania

Railroad, and over three thousand persons

took advantage of the opportunity to go out there

and witness this demonstration for themselves. In

this great crowd were many public officials and men

of prominence in all walks of life, who were enthusiastic

in their praises.



In the mean time, the mind that conceived and

made practical this invention could not rest content

with anything less than perfection, so far as it could

be realized. Edison was not satisfied with paper

carbons. They were not fully up to the ideal that

he had in mind. What he sought was a perfectly

uniform and homogeneous carbon, one like the "One-

Hoss Shay," that had no weak spots to break down

at inopportune times. He began to carbonize everything

in nature that he could lay hands on. In his

laboratory note-books are innumerable jottings of the

things that were carbonized and tried, such as tissue-

paper, soft paper, all kinds of cardboards, drawing-

paper of all grades, paper saturated with tar, all kinds

of threads, fish-line, threads rubbed with tarred lampblack,

fine threads plaited together in strands, cotton

soaked in boiling tar, lamp-wick, twine, tar and

lampblack mixed with a proportion of lime, vulcanized

fibre, celluloid, boxwood, cocoanut hair and

shell, spruce, hickory, baywood, cedar and maple

shavings, rosewood, punk, cork, bagging, flax, and

a host of other things. He also extended his searches

far into the realms of nature in the line of grasses,

plants, canes, and similar products, and in these

experiments at that time and later he carbonized, made

into lamps, and tested no fewer than six thousand

different species of vegetable growths.



The reasons for such prodigious research are not

apparent on the face of the subject, nor is this the

occasion to enter into an explanation, as that alone

would be sufficient to fill a fair-sized book. Suffice it

to say that Edison's omnivorous reading, keen observation,

power of assimilating facts and natural

phenomena, and skill in applying the knowledge thus

attained to whatever was in hand, now came into full

play in determining that the results he desired could

only be obtained in certain directions.



At this time he was investigating everything with

a microscope, and one day in the early part of 1880

he noticed upon a table in the laboratory an ordinary

palm-leaf fan. He picked it up and, looking it

over, observed that it had a binding rim made of

bamboo, cut from the outer edge of the cane; a very

long strip. He examined this, and then gave it to

one of his assistants, telling him to cut it up and get

out of it all the filaments he could, carbonize them,

put them into lamps, and try them. The results of

this trial were exceedingly successful, far better than

with anything else thus far used; indeed, so much so,

that after further experiments and microscopic

examinations Edison was convinced that he was now on

the right track for making a thoroughly stable,

commercial lamp; and shortly afterward he sent a man

to Japan to procure further supplies of bamboo. The

fascinating story of the bamboo hunt will be told

later; but even this bamboo lamp was only one item

of a complete system to be devised--a system that

has since completely revolutionized the art of interior

illumination.



Reference has been made in this chapter to the

preliminary study that Edison brought to bear on

the development of the gas art and industry. This

study was so exhaustive that one can only compare it

to the careful investigation made in advance by any

competent war staff of the elements of strength and

weakness, on both sides, in a possible campaign. A

popular idea of Edison that dies hard, pictures a

breezy, slap-dash, energetic inventor arriving at new

results by luck and intuition, making boastful

assertions and then winning out by mere chance. The

native simplicity of the man, the absence of pose and

ceremony, do much to strengthen this notion; but

the real truth is that while gifted with unusual imagination,

Edison's march to the goal of a new invention

is positively humdrum and monotonous in its

steady progress. No one ever saw Edison in a hurry;

no one ever saw him lazy; and that which he did with

slow, careful scrutiny six months ago, he will be doing

with just as much calm deliberation of research six

months hence--and six years hence if necessary. If,

for instance, he were asked to find the most perfect

pebble on the Atlantic shore of New Jersey, instead

of hunting here, there, and everywhere for the desired

object, we would no doubt find him patiently

screening the entire beach, sifting out the most perfect

stones and eventually, by gradual exclusion,

reaching the long-sought-for pebble; and the mere

fact that in this search years might be taken, would

not lessen his enthusiasm to the slightest extent.



In the "prospectus book" among the series of famous

note-books, all the references and data apply to

gas. The book is numbered 184, falls into the period

now dealt with, and runs along casually with items

spread out over two or three years. All these notes

refer specifically to "Electricity vs. Gas as General

Illuminants," and cover an astounding range of inquiry

and comment. One of the very first notes tells

the whole story: "Object, Edison to effect exact

imitation of all done by gas, so as to replace lighting

by gas by lighting by electricity. To improve the

illumination to such an extent as to meet all requirements

of natural, artificial, and commercial conditions."

A large programme, but fully executed!

The notes, it will be understood, are all in Edison's

handwriting. They go on to observe that "a general

system of distribution is the only possible means of

economical illumination," and they dismiss isolated-

plant lighting as in mills and factories as of so little

importance to the public--"we shall leave the con-

sideration of this out of this book." The shrewd

prophecy is made that gas will be manufactured less

for lighting, as the result of electrical competition,

and more and more for heating, etc., thus enlarging

its market and increasing its income. Comment is

made on kerosene and its cost, and all kinds of general

statistics are jotted down as desirable. Data are

to be obtained on lamp and dynamo efficiency, and

"Another review of the whole thing as worked out

upon pure science principles by Rowland, Young,

Trowbridge; also Rowland on the possibilities and

probabilities of cheaper production by better

manufacture--higher incandescence without decrease of

life of lamps." Notes are also made on meters and

motors. "It doesn't matter if electricity is used for

light or for power"; while small motors, it is observed,

can be used night or day, and small steam-engines are

inconvenient. Again the shrewd comment: "Generally

poorest district for light, best for power, thus

evening up whole city--the effect of this on investment."



It is pointed out that "Previous inventions failed--

necessities for commercial success and accomplishment

by Edison. Edison's great effort--not to make

a large light or a blinding light, but a small light

having the mildness of gas." Curves are then called

for of iron and copper investment--also energy

line--curves of candle-power and electromotive force;

curves on motors; graphic representation of the

consumption of gas January to December; tables and

formulae; representations graphically of what one

dollar will buy in different kinds of light; "table,

weight of copper required different distance, 100-ohm

lamp, 16 candles"; table with curves showing increased

economy by larger engine, higher power, etc.

There is not much that is dilettante about all this.

Note is made of an article in April, 1879, putting the

total amount of gas investment in the whole world

at that time at $1,500,000,000; which is now (1910)

about the amount of the electric-lighting investment

in the United States. Incidentally a note remarks:

"So unpleasant is the effect of the products of gas

that in the new Madison Square Theatre every gas

jet is ventilated by special tubes to carry away the

products of combustion." In short, there is no aspect

of the new problem to which Edison failed to apply

his acutest powers; and the speed with which the

new system was worked out and introduced was

simply due to his initial mastery of all the factors in

the older art. Luther Stieringer, an expert gas engineer

and inventor, whose services were early enlisted,

once said that Edison knew more about gas

than any other man he had ever met. The remark

is an evidence of the kind of preparation Edison gave

himself for his new task.


