




CHAPTER XII



MEMORIES OF MENLO PARK



FROM the spring of 1876 to 1886 Edison lived and

did his work at Menlo Park; and at this stage

of the narrative, midway in that interesting and

eventful period, it is appropriate to offer a few notes

and jottings on the place itself, around which tradition

is already weaving its fancies, just as at the time

the outpouring of new inventions from it invested

the name with sudden prominence and with the

glamour of romance. "In 1876 I moved," says Edison,

"to Menlo Park, New Jersey, on the Pennsylvania

Railroad, several miles below Elizabeth. The

move was due to trouble I had about rent. I had

rented a small shop in Newark, on the top floor of

a padlock factory, by the month. I gave notice that

I would give it up at the end of the month, paid the

rent, moved out, and delivered the keys. Shortly

afterward I was served with a paper, probably a

judgment, wherein I was to pay nine months' rent.

There was some law, it seems, that made a monthly

renter liable for a year. This seemed so unjust that I

determined to get out of a place that permitted such

injustice." For several Sundays he walked through

different parts of New Jersey with two of his assistants

before he decided on Menlo Park. The change was

a fortunate one, for the inventor had married Miss

Mary E. Stillwell, and was now able to establish himself

comfortably with his wife and family while enjoying

immediate access to the new laboratory. Every

moment thus saved was valuable.



To-day the place and region have gone back to the

insignificance from which Edison's genius lifted them

so startlingly. A glance from the car windows

reveals only a gently rolling landscape dotted with

modest residences and unpretentious barns; and

there is nothing in sight by way of memorial to suggest

that for nearly a decade this spot was the scene

of the most concentrated and fruitful inventive activity

the world has ever known. Close to the Menlo Park

railway station is a group of gaunt and deserted buildings,

shelter of the casual tramp, and slowly crumbling

away when not destroyed by the carelessness of

some ragged smoker. This silent group of buildings

comprises the famous old laboratory and workshops

of Mr. Edison, historic as being the birthplace of the

carbon transmitter, the phonograph, the incandescent

lamp, and the spot where Edison also worked

out his systems of electrical distribution, his

commercial dynamo, his electric railway, his megaphone,

his tasimeter, and many other inventions of greater

or lesser degree. Here he continued, moreover, his

earlier work on the quadruplex, sextuplex, multiplex,

and automatic telegraphs, and did his notable pioneer

work in wireless telegraphy. As the reader knows,

it had been a master passion with Edison from boyhood

up to possess a laboratory, in which with free

use of his own time and powers, and with command

of abundant material resources, he could wrestle with

Nature and probe her closest secrets. Thus, from the

little cellar at Port Huron, from the scant shelves in

a baggage car, from the nooks and corners of dingy

telegraph offices, and the grimy little shops in New

York and Newark, he had now come to the proud

ownership of an establishment to which his favorite

word "laboratory" might justly be applied. Here

he could experiment to his heart's content and invent

on a larger, bolder scale than ever--and he did!



Menlo Park was the merest hamlet. Omitting the

laboratory structures, it had only about seven houses,

the best looking of which Edison lived in, a place that

had a windmill pumping water into a reservoir. One

of the stories of the day was that Edison had his

front gate so connected with the pumping plant that

every visitor as he opened or closed the gate added

involuntarily to the supply in the reservoir. Two or

three of the houses were occupied by the families of

members of the staff; in the others boarders were

taken, the laboratory, of course, furnishing all the

patrons. Near the railway station was a small

saloon kept by an old Scotchman named Davis,

where billiards were played in idle moments, and

where in the long winter evenings the hot stove was

a centre of attraction to loungers and story-tellers.

The truth is that there was very little social life of

any kind possible under the strenuous conditions prevailing

at the laboratory, where, if anywhere, relaxation

was enjoyed at odd intervals of fatigue and waiting.



The main laboratory was a spacious wooden building

of two floors. The office was in this building at

first, until removed to the brick library when that

was finished. There S. L. Griffin, an old telegraph

friend of Edison, acted as his secretary and had charge

of a voluminous and amazing correspondence. The

office employees were the Carman brothers and the

late John F. Randolph, afterwards secretary. According

to Mr. Francis Jehl, of Budapest, then one of the

staff, to whom the writers are indebted for a great

deal of valuable data on this period: "It was on the

upper story of this laboratory that the most important

experiments were executed, and where the incandescent

lamp was born. This floor consisted of a

large hall containing several long tables, upon which

could be found all the various instruments, scientific

and chemical apparatus that the arts at that time

could produce. Books lay promiscuously about,

while here and there long lines of bichromate-of-

potash cells could be seen, together with experimental

models of ideas that Edison or his assistants were

engaged upon. The side walls of this hall were lined

with shelves filled with bottles, phials, and other

receptacles containing every imaginable chemical and

other material that could be obtained, while at the

end of this hall, and near the organ which stood in

the rear, was a large glass case containing the world's

most precious metals in sheet and wire form, together

with very rare and costly chemicals. When evening

came on, and the last rays of the setting sun penetrated

through the side windows, this hall looked like

a veritable Faust laboratory.



"On the ground floor we had our testing-table,

which stood on two large pillars of brick built deep

into the earth in order to get rid of all vibrations on

account of the sensitive instruments that were upon

it. There was the Thomson reflecting mirror galvanometer

and electrometer, while nearby were the

standard cells by which the galvanometers were

adjusted and standardized. This testing-table was

connected by means of wires with all parts of the

laboratory and machine-shop, so that measurements

could be conveniently made from a distance, as in

those days we had no portable and direct-reading

instruments, such as now exist. Opposite this table we

installed, later on, our photometrical chamber, which

was constructed on the Bunsen principle. A little

way from this table, and separated by a partition,

we had the chemical laboratory with its furnaces and

stink-chambers. Later on another chemical laboratory

was installed near the photometer-room, and this

Dr. A. Haid had charge of."



Next to the laboratory in importance was the machine-

shop, a large and well-lighted building of brick,

at one end of which there was the boiler and engine-

room. This shop contained light and heavy lathes,

boring and drilling machines, all kinds of planing

machines; in fact, tools of all descriptions, so that

any apparatus, however delicate or heavy, could be

made and built as might be required by Edison in

experimenting. Mr. John Kruesi had charge of this

shop, and was assisted by a number of skilled mechanics,

notably John Ott, whose deft fingers and

quick intuitive grasp of the master's ideas are still

in demand under the more recent conditions at the

Llewellyn Park laboratory in Orange.



Between the machine-shop and the laboratory was

a small building of wood used as a carpenter-shop,

where Tom Logan plied his art. Nearby was the

gasoline plant. Before the incandescent lamp was

perfected, the only illumination was from gasoline

gas; and that was used later for incandescent-lamp

glass-blowing, which was done in another small building

on one side of the laboratory. Apparently little

or no lighting service was obtained from the Wallace-

Farmer arc lamps secured from Ansonia, Connecticut.

The dynamo was probably needed for Edison's own

experiments.



On the outskirts of the property was a small building

in which lampblack was crudely but carefully

manufactured and pressed into very small cakes, for

use in the Edison carbon transmitters of that time.

The night-watchman, Alfred Swanson, took care of

this curious plant, which consisted of a battery of

petroleum lamps that were forced to burn to the

sooting point. During his rounds in the night Swanson

would find time to collect from the chimneys the

soot that the lamps gave. It was then weighed out

into very small portions, which were pressed into

cakes or buttons by means of a hand-press. These

little cakes were delicately packed away between

layers of cotton in small, light boxes and shipped to

Bergmann in New York, by whom the telephone

transmitters were being made. A little later the Edison

electric railway was built on the confines of the

property out through the woods, at first only a third

of a mile in length, but reaching ultimately to Pumptown,

almost three miles away.



Mr. Edison's own words may be quoted as to the

men with whom he surrounded himself here and

upon whose services he depended principally for help

in the accomplishment of his aims. In an autobiographical

article in the Electrical World of March 5,

1904, he says: "It is interesting to note that in

addition to those mentioned above (Charles Batchelor

and Frank Upton), I had around me other men who

ever since have remained active in the field, such as

Messrs. Francis Jehl, William J. Hammer, Martin

Force, Ludwig K. Boehm, not forgetting that good

friend and co-worker, the late John Kruesi. They

found plenty to do in the various developments of

the art, and as I now look back I sometimes wonder

how we did so much in so short a time." Mr. Jehl

in his reminiscences adds another name to the above

--namely, that of John W. Lawson, and then goes on

to say: "These are the names of the pioneers of

incandescent lighting, who were continuously at the

side of Edison day and night for some years, and who,

under his guidance, worked upon the carbon-filament

lamp from its birth to ripe maturity. These men all

had complete faith in his ability and stood by him

as on a rock, guarding their work with the secretiveness

of a burglar-proof safe. Whenever it leaked out

in the world that Edison was succeeding in his work on

the electric light, spies and others came to the Park;

so it was of the utmost importance that the experiments

and their results should be kept a secret until

Edison had secured the protection of the Patent

Office." With this staff was associated from the first

Mr. E. H. Johnson, whose work with Mr. Edison lay

chiefly, however, outside the laboratory, taking him

to all parts of the country and to Europe. There were

also to be regarded as detached members of it the

Bergmann brothers, manufacturing for Mr. Edison in

New York, and incessantly experimenting for him.

In addition there must be included Mr. Samuel Insull,

whose activities for many years as private secretary

and financial manager were devoted solely to Mr.

Edison's interests, with Menlo Park as a centre and

main source of anxiety as to pay-rolls and other

constantly recurring obligations. The names of yet

other associates occur from time to time in this

narrative--"Edison men" who have been very proud

of their close relationship to the inventor and his

work at old Menlo. "There was also Mr. Charles L.

Clarke, who devoted himself mainly to engineering

matters, and later on acted as chief engineer of the

Edison Electric Light Company for some years.

Then there were William Holzer and James Hipple,

both of whom took an active part in the practical

development of the glass-blowing department of the

laboratory, and, subsequently, at the first Edison

lamp factory at Menlo Park. Later on Messrs. Jehl,

Hipple, and Force assisted Mr. Batchelor to install

the lamp-works of the French Edison Company at

Ivry-sur-Seine. Then there were Messrs. Charles T.

Hughes, Samuel D. Mott, and Charles T. Mott, who

devoted their time chiefly to commercial affairs. Mr.

Hughes conducted most of this work, and later on took

a prominent part in Edison's electric-railway

experiments. His business ability was on a high level,

while his personal character endeared him to us all.



Among other now well-known men who came to us

and assisted in various kinds of work were Messrs.

Acheson, Worth, Crosby, Herrick, and Hill, while

Doctor Haid was placed by Mr. Edison in charge of

a special chemical laboratory. Dr. E. L. Nichols

was also with us for a short time conducting a special

series of experiments. There was also Mr. Isaacs,

who did a great deal of photographic work, and to

whom we must be thankful for the pictures of Menlo

Park in connection with Edison's work.



"Among others who were added to Mr. Kruesi's

staff in the machine-shop were Messrs. J. H. Vail and

W. S. Andrews. Mr. Vail had charge of the dynamo-

room. He had a good general knowledge of machinery,

and very soon acquired such familiarity with the

dynamos that he could skip about among them with

astonishing agility to regulate their brushes or to

throw rosin on the belts when they began to squeal.

Later on he took an active part in the affairs and

installations of the Edison Light Company. Mr.

Andrews stayed on Mr. Kruesi's staff as long as the

laboratory machine-shop was kept open, after which

he went into the employ of the Edison Electric Light

Company and became actively engaged in the commercial

and technical exploitation of the system.

Another man who was with us at Menlo Park was Mr.

Herman Claudius, an Austrian, who at one time was

employed in connection with the State Telegraphs of

his country. To him Mr. Edison assigned the task

of making a complete model of the network of

conductors for the contemplated first station in New

York."



Mr. Francis R. Upton, who was early employed by

Mr. Edison as his mathematician, furnishes a pleasant,

vivid picture of his chief associates engaged on

the memorable work at Menlo Park. He says: "Mr.

Charles Batchelor was Mr. Edison's principal assistant

at that time. He was an Englishman, and came

to this country to set up the thread-weaving machinery

for the Clark thread-works. He was a most

intelligent, patient, competent, and loyal assistant to

Mr. Edison. I remember distinctly seeing him work

many hours to mount a small filament; and his hand

would be as steady and his patience as unyielding at

the end of those many hours as it was at the beginning,

in spite of repeated failures. He was a wonderful

mechanic; the control that he had of his fingers

was marvellous, and his eyesight was sharp. Mr.

Batchelor's judgment and good sense were always

in evidence.



"Mr. Kruesi was the superintendent, a Swiss trained

in the best Swiss ideas of accuracy. He was a splendid

mechanic with a vigorous temper, and wonderful

ability to work continuously and to get work out of

men. It was an ideal combination, that of Edison,

Batchelor, and Kruesi. Mr. Edison with his wonderful

flow of ideas which were sharply defined in his

mind, as can be seen by any of the sketches that he

made, as he evidently always thinks in three dimensions;

Mr. Kruesi, willing to take the ideas, and

capable of comprehending them, would distribute

the work so as to get it done with marvellous quickness

and great accuracy. Mr. Batchelor was always

ready for any special fine experimenting or observa-

tion, and could hold to whatever he was at as long

as Mr. Edison wished; and always brought to bear

on what he was at the greatest skill."



While Edison depended upon Upton for his mathematical

work, he was wont to check it up in a very

practical manner, as evidenced by the following incident

described by Mr. Jehl: "I was once with Mr.

Upton calculating some tables which he had put me

on, when Mr. Edison appeared with a glass bulb

having a pear-shaped appearance in his hand. It was

the kind that we were going to use for our lamp

experiments; and Mr. Edison asked Mr. Upton to

please calculate for him its cubic contents in centimetres.

Now Mr. Upton was a very able mathematician,

who, after he finished his studies at Princeton,

went to Germany and got his final gloss under

that great master, Helmholtz. Whatever he did and

worked on was executed in a pure mathematical

manner, and any wrangler at Oxford would have been

delighted to see him juggle with integral and differential

equations, with a dexterity that was surprising.

He drew the shape of the bulb exactly on paper,

and got the equation of its lines with which he was

going to calculate its contents, when Mr. Edison again

appeared and asked him what it was. He showed

Edison the work he had already done on the subject,

and told him that he would very soon finish calculating

it. `Why,' said Edison, `I would simply take

that bulb and fill it with mercury and weigh it; and

from the weight of the mercury and its specific gravity

I'll get it in five minutes, and use less mental energy

than is necessary in such a fatiguing operation.' "



Menlo Park became ultimately the centre of Edison's

business life as it was of his inventing. After

the short distasteful period during the introduction

of his lighting system, when he spent a large part of

his time at the offices at 65 Fifth Avenue, New York,

or on the actual work connected with the New York

Edison installation, he settled back again in Menlo

Park altogether. Mr. Samuel Insull describes the

business methods which prevailed throughout the

earlier Menlo Park days of "storm and stress," and

the curious conditions with which he had to deal as

private secretary: "I never attempted to systematize

Edison's business life. Edison's whole method

of work would upset the system of any office. He

was just as likely to be at work in his laboratory at

midnight as midday. He cared not for the hours of

the day or the days of the week. If he was exhausted

he might more likely be asleep in the middle of the

day than in the middle of the night, as most of his

work in the way of inventions was done at night. I

used to run his office on as close business methods as

my experience admitted; and I would get at him

whenever it suited his convenience. Sometimes he

would not go over his mail for days at a time; but

other times he would go regularly to his office in the

morning. At other times my engagements used to

be with him to go over his business affairs at Menlo

Park at night, if I was occupied in New York during

the day. In fact, as a matter of convenience I used

more often to get at him at night, as it left my days

free to transact his affairs, and enabled me, probably

at a midnight luncheon, to get a few minutes of his

time to look over his correspondence and get his

directions as to what I should do in some particular

negotiation or matter of finance. While it was a

matter of suiting Edison's convenience as to when I

should transact business with him, it also suited my

own ideas, as it enabled me after getting through my

business with him to enjoy the privilege of watching

him at his work, and to learn something about the

technical side of matters. Whatever knowledge I

may have of the electric light and power industry I

feel I owe it to the tuition of Edison. He was about

the most willing tutor, and I must confess that he

had to be a patient one."



Here again occurs the reference to the incessant

night-work at Menlo Park, a note that is struck in

every reminiscence and in every record of the time.

But it is not to be inferred that the atmosphere of

grim determination and persistent pursuit of the new

invention characteristic of this period made life a

burden to the small family of laborers associated with

Edison. Many a time during the long, weary nights

of experimenting Edison would call a halt for

refreshments, which he had ordered always to be sent

in when night-work was in progress. Everything

would be dropped, all present would join in the meal,

and the last good story or joke would pass around.

In his notes Mr. Jehl says: "Our lunch always ended

with a cigar, and I may mention here that although

Edison was never fastidious in eating, he always

relished a good cigar, and seemed to find in it

consolation and solace.... It often happened that while

we were enjoying the cigars after our midnight re-

past, one of the boys would start up a tune on the

organ and we would all sing together, or one of the

others would give a solo. Another of the boys had

a voice that sounded like something between the ring

of an old tomato can and a pewter jug. He had one

song that he would sing while we roared with laughter.

He was also great in imitating the tin-foil

phonograph.... When Boehm was in good-humor he would

play his zither now and then, and amuse us by singing

pretty German songs. On many of these occasions

the laboratory was the rendezvous of jolly and

convivial visitors, mostly old friends and acquaintances

of Mr. Edison. Some of the office employees

would also drop in once in a while, and as everybody

present was always welcome to partake of the midnight

meal, we all enjoyed these gatherings. After

a while, when we were ready to resume work, our

visitors would intimate that they were going home

to bed, but we fellows could stay up and work, and

they would depart, generally singing some song like

Good-night, ladies! . . . It often happened that when

Edison had been working up to three or four o'clock

in the morning, he would lie down on one of the

laboratory tables, and with nothing but a couple of

books for a pillow, would fall into a sound sleep.

He said it did him more good than being in a soft

bed, which spoils a man. Some of the laboratory

assistants could be seen now and then sleeping on a

table in the early morning hours. If their snoring

became objectionable to those still at work, the

`calmer' was applied. This machine consisted of a

Babbitt's soap box without a cover. Upon it was

mounted a broad ratchet-wheel with a crank, while

into the teeth of the wheel there played a stout,

elastic slab of wood. The box would be placed on

the table where the snorer was sleeping and the crank

turned rapidly. The racket thus produced was something

terrible, and the sleeper would jump up as

though a typhoon had struck the laboratory. The

irrepressible spirit of humor in the old days, although

somewhat strenuous at times, caused many a moment

of hilarity which seemed to refresh the boys, and

enabled them to work with renewed vigor after its

manifestation." Mr. Upton remarks that often during

the period of the invention of the incandescent

lamp, when under great strain and fatigue, Edison

would go to the organ and play tunes in a primitive

way, and come back to crack jokes with the staff.

"But I have often felt that Mr. Edison never could

comprehend the limitations of the strength of other

men, as his own physical and mental strength have

always seemed to be without limit. He could work

continuously as long as he wished, and had sleep at

his command. His sleep was always instant, profound,

and restful. He has told me that he never

dreamed. I have known Mr. Edison now for thirty-one

years, and feel that he has always kept his mind direct

and simple, going straight to the root of troubles.

One of the peculiarities I have noticed is that I have

never known him to break into a conversation going

on around him, and ask what people were talking

about. The nearest he would ever come to it was

when there had evidently been some story told, and

his face would express a desire to join in the laugh,

which would immediately invite telling the story to

him."



Next to those who worked with Edison at the laboratory

and were with him constantly at Menlo Park

were the visitors, some of whom were his business

associates, some of them scientific men, and some of

them hero-worshippers and curiosity-hunters. Foremost

in the first category was Mr. E. H. Johnson,

who was in reality Edison's most intimate friend, and

was required for constant consultation; but whose

intense activity, remarkable grasp of electrical

principles, and unusual powers of exposition, led to his

frequent detachment for long trips, including those

which resulted in the introduction of the telephone,

phonograph, and electric light in England and on

the Continent. A less frequent visitor was Mr. S.

Bergmann, who had all he needed to occupy his time

in experimenting and manufacturing, and whose

contemporaneous Wooster Street letter-heads advertised

Edison's inventions as being made there, Among

the scientists were Prof. George F. Barker, of Philadelphia,

a big, good-natured philosopher, whose valuable

advice Edison esteemed highly. In sharp contrast

to him was the earnest, serious Rowland, of

Johns Hopkins University, afterward the leading

American physicist of his day. Profs. C. F. Brackett

and C. F. Young, of Princeton University, were often

received, always interested in what Edison was doing,

and proud that one of their own students, Mr. Upton,

was taking such a prominent part in the development

of the work.



Soon after the success of the lighting experiments

and the installation at Menlo Park became known,

Edison was besieged by persons from all parts of the

world anxious to secure rights and concessions for

their respective countries. Among these was Mr.

Louis Rau, of Paris, who organized the French Edison

Company, the pioneer Edison lighting corporation

in Europe, and who, with the aid of Mr. Batchelor,

established lamp-works and a machine-shop at Ivry

sur-Seine, near Paris, in 1882. It was there that Mr.

Nikola Tesla made his entree into the field of light

and power, and began his own career as an inventor;

and there also Mr. Etienne Fodor, general manager

of the Hungarian General Electric Company at Budapest,

received his early training. It was he who

erected at Athens the first European Edison station

on the now universal three-wire system. Another

visitor from Europe, a little later, was Mr. Emil

Rathenau, the present director of the great

Allgemeine Elektricitaets Gesellschaft of Germany. He

secured the rights for the empire, and organized the

Berlin Edison system, now one of the largest in the

world. Through his extraordinary energy and enterprise

the business made enormous strides, and Mr.

Rathenau has become one of the most conspicuous

industrial figures in his native country. From Italy

came Professor Colombo, later a cabinet minister,

with his friend Signor Buzzi, of Milan. The rights

were secured for the peninsula; Colombo and his

friends organized the Italian Edison Company, and

erected at Milan the first central station in that

country. Mr. John W. Lieb, Jr., now a vice-president

of the New York Edison Company, was sent

over by Mr. Edison to steer the enterprise technically,

and spent ten years in building it up, with such brilliant

success that he was later decorated as Commander

of the Order of the Crown of Italy by King

Victor. Another young American enlisted into European

service was Mr. E. G. Acheson, the inventor of

carborundum, who built a number of plants in Italy

and France before he returned home. Mr. Lieb has

since become President of the American Institute of

Electrical Engineers and the Association of Edison

Illuminating Companies, while Doctor Acheson has

been President of the American Electrochemical

Society.



Switzerland sent Messrs. Turrettini, Biedermann,

and Thury, all distinguished engineers, to negotiate

for rights in the republic; and so it went with regard

to all the other countries of Europe, as well as those

of South America. It was a question of keeping such

visitors away rather than of inviting them to take

up the exploitation of the Edison system; for what

time was not spent in personal interviews was required

for the masses of letters from every country

under the sun, all making inquiries, offering suggestions,

proposing terms. Nor were the visitors merely

those on business bent. There were the lion-hunters

and celebrities, of whom Sarah Bernhardt may serve

as a type. One visit of note was that paid by Lieut.

G. W. De Long, who had an earnest and protracted

conversation with Edison over the Arctic expedition he

was undertaking with the aid of Mr. James Gordon

Bennett, of the New York Herald. The Jeannette was

being fitted out, and Edison told De Long that he

would make and present him with a small dynamo

machine, some incandescent lamps, and an arc lamp.

While the little dynamo was being built all the men

in the laboratory wrote their names on the paper

insulation that was wound upon the iron core of the

armature. As the Jeannette had no steam-engine on

board that could be used for the purpose, Edison

designed the dynamo so that it could be worked by

man power and told Lieutenant De Long "it would

keep the boys warm up in the Arctic," when they

generated current with it. The ill-fated ship never

returned from her voyage, but went down in the icy

waters of the North, there to remain until some

future cataclysm of nature, ten thousand years

hence, shall reveal the ship and the first marine

dynamo as curious relics of a remote civilization.



Edison also furnished De Long with a set of telephones

provided with extensible circuits, so that

parties on the ice-floes could go long distances from

the ship and still keep in communication with her.

So far as the writers can ascertain this is the first

example of "field telephony." Another nautical experiment

that he made at this time, suggested probably

by the requirements of the Arctic expedition,

was a buoy that was floated in New York harbor,

and which contained a small Edison dynamo and two

or three incandescent lamps. The dynamo was

driven by the wave or tide motion through intermediate

mechanism, and thus the lamps were lit up

from time to time, serving as signals. These were the

prototypes of the lighted buoys which have since

become familiar, as in the channel off Sandy Hook.



One notable afternoon was that on which the

New York board of aldermen took a special train out

to Menlo Park to see the lighting system with its

conductors underground in operation. The Edison Electric

Illuminating Company was applying for a franchise,

and the aldermen, for lack of scientific training and

specific practical information, were very sceptical on

the subject--as indeed they might well be. "Mr.

Edison demonstrated personally the details and

merits of the system to them. The voltage was increased

to a higher pressure than usual, and all the

incandescent lamps at Menlo Park did their best to

win the approbation of the New York City fathers.

After Edison had finished exhibiting all the good

points of his system, he conducted his guests upstairs

in the laboratory, where a long table was

spread with the best things that one of the most

prominent New York caterers could furnish. The

laboratory witnessed high times that night, for all

were in the best of humor, and many a bottle was

drained in toasting the health of Edison and the

aldermen." This was one of the extremely rare

occasions on which Edison has addressed an audience;

but the stake was worth the effort. The representatives

of New York could with justice drink the health

of the young inventor, whose system is one of the

greatest boons the city has ever had conferred upon it.



Among other frequent visitors was Mr, Edison's

father, "one of those amiable, patriarchal characters

with a Horace Greeley beard, typical Americans of

the old school," who would sometimes come into the

laboratory with his two grandchildren, a little boy

and girl called "Dash" and "Dot." He preferred

to sit and watch his brilliant son at work "with an

expression of satisfaction on his face that indicated

a sense of happiness and content that his boy, born

in that distant, humble home in Ohio, had risen to

fame and brought such honor upon the name. It

was, indeed, a pathetic sight to see a father venerate

his son as the elder Edison did." Not less at home

was Mr. Mackenzie, the Mt. Clemens station agent,

the life of whose child Edison had saved when a train

newsboy. The old Scotchman was one of the innocent,

chartered libertines of the place, with an unlimited

stock of good jokes and stories, but seldom

of any practical use. On one occasion, however, when

everything possible and impossible under the sun was

being carbonized for lamp filaments, he allowed a

handful of his bushy red beard to be taken for the

purpose; and his laugh was the loudest when the

Edison-Mackenzie hair lamps were brought up to

incandescence--their richness in red rays being slyly

attributed to the nature of the filamentary material!

Oddly enough, a few years later, some inventor

actually took out a patent for making incandescent

lamps with carbonized hair for filaments!



Yet other visitors again haunted the place, and

with the following reminiscence of one of them, from

Mr. Edison himself, this part of the chapter must

close: "At Menlo Park one cold winter night there

came into the laboratory a strange man in a most

pitiful condition. He was nearly frozen, and he asked

if he might sit by the stove. In a few moments he

asked for the head man, and I was brought forward.

He had a head of abnormal size, with highly intellectual

features and a very small and emaciated body.

He said he was suffering very much, and asked if I

had any morphine. As I had about everything in

chemistry that could be bought, I told him I had.

He requested that I give him some, so I got the

morphine sulphate. He poured out enough to kill

two men, when I told him that we didn't keep a hotel

for suicides, and he had better cut the quantity down.

He then bared his legs and arms, and they were literally

pitted with scars, due to the use of hypodermic

syringes. He said he had taken it for years, and it

required a big dose to have any effect. I let him go

ahead. In a short while he seemed like another man

and began to tell stories, and there were about fifty

of us who sat around listening until morning. He

was a man of great intelligence and education. He

said he was a Jew, but there was no distinctive feature

to verify this assertion. He continued to stay around

until he finished every combination of morphine with

an acid that I had, probably ten ounces all told.

Then he asked if he could have strychnine. I had

an ounce of the sulphate. He took enough to kill a

horse, and asserted it had as good an effect as

morphine. When this was gone, the only thing I had

left was a chunk of crude opium, perhaps two or

three pounds. He chewed this up and disappeared.

I was greatly disappointed, because I would have

laid in another stock of morphine to keep him at the

laboratory. About a week afterward he was found

dead in a barn at Perth Amboy."



Returning to the work itself, note of which has al-

ready been made in this and preceding chapters, we

find an interesting and unique reminiscence in Mr.

Jehl's notes of the reversion to carbon as a filament

in the lamps, following an exhibition of metallic-

filament lamps given in the spring of 1879 to the men

in the syndicate advancing the funds for these

experiments: "They came to Menlo Park on a late

afternoon train from New York. It was already

dark when they were conducted into the machine-

shop, where we had several platinum lamps installed

in series. When Edison had finished explaining the

principles and details of the lamp, he asked Kruesi to

let the dynamo machine run. It was of the Gramme

type, as our first dynamo of the Edison design was

not yet finished. Edison then ordered the `juice'

to be turned on slowly. To-day I can see those lamps

rising to a cherry red, like glowbugs, and hear Mr.

Edison saying `a little more juice,' and the lamps

began to glow. `A little more' is the command

again, and then one of the lamps emits for an instant

a light like a star in the distance, after which there is

an eruption and a puff; and the machine-shop is in

total darkness. We knew instantly which lamp had

failed, and Batchelor replaced that by a good one,

having a few in reserve near by. The operation was

repeated two or three times with about the same

results, after which the party went into the library

until it was time to catch the train for New York."



Such an exhibition was decidedly discouraging,

and it was not a jubilant party that returned to New

York, but: "That night Edison remained in the

laboratory meditating upon the results that the

platinum lamp had given so far. I was engaged reading

a book near a table in the front, while Edison was

seated in a chair by a table near the organ. With

his head turned downward, and that conspicuous

lock of hair hanging loosely on one side, he looked

like Napoleon in the celebrated picture, On the Eve

of a Great Battle. Those days were heroic ones, for

he then battled against mighty odds, and the prospects

were dim and not very encouraging. In cases

of emergency Edison always possessed a keen faculty

of deciding immediately and correctly what to do;

and the decision he then arrived at was predestined

to be the turning-point that led him on to ultimate

success.... After that exhibition we had a house-

cleaning at the laboratory, and the metallic-filament

lamps were stored away, while preparations were

made for our experiments on carbon lamps."



Thus the work went on. Menlo Park has hitherto

been associated in the public thought with the

telephone, phonograph, and incandescent lamp; but it

was there, equally, that the Edison dynamo and

system of distribution were created and applied to

their specific purposes. While all this study of a

possible lamp was going on, Mr. Upton was busy

calculating the economy of the "multiple arc" system,

and making a great many tables to determine what

resistance a lamp should have for the best results,

and at what point the proposed general system would

fall off in economy when the lamps were of the lower

resistance that was then generally assumed to be

necessary. The world at that time had not the

shadow of an idea as to what the principles of a

multiple arc system should be, enabling millions of

lamps to be lighted off distributing circuits, each

lamp independent of every other; but at Menlo Park

at that remote period in the seventies Mr. Edison's

mathematician was formulating the inventor's

conception in clear, instructive figures; "and the work

then executed has held its own ever since." From

the beginning of his experiments on electric light,

Mr. Edison had a well-defined idea of producing not

only a practicable lamp, but also a SYSTEM of

commercial electric lighting. Such a scheme involved the

creation of an entirely new art, for there was nothing

on the face of the earth from which to draw assistance

or precedent, unless we except the elementary forms

of dynamos then in existence. It is true, there were

several types of machines in use for the then very

limited field of arc lighting, but they were regarded

as valueless as a part of a great comprehensive scheme

which could supply everybody with light. Such

machines were confessedly inefficient, although

representing the farthest reach of a young art. A

commission appointed at that time by the Franklin

Institute, and including Prof. Elihu Thomson,

investigated the merits of existing dynamos and

reported as to the best of them: "The Gramme machine

is the most economical as a means of converting

motive force into electricity; it utilizes in the arc

from 38 to 41 per cent. of the motive work produced,

after deduction is made for friction and the resistance

of the air." They reported also that the Brush arc

lighting machine "produces in the luminous arc useful

work equivalent to 31 per cent. of the motive

power employed, or to 38 1/2 per cent. after the friction

has been deducted." Commercial possibilities could

not exist in the face of such low economy as this, and

Mr. Edison realized that he would have to improve

the dynamo himself if he wanted a better machine.

The scientific world at that time was engaged in a

controversy regarding the external and internal resistance

of a circuit in which a generator was situated.

Discussing the subject Mr. Jehl, in his biographical

notes, says: "While this controversy raged in the

scientific papers, and criticism and confusion seemed

at its height, Edison and Upton discussed this question

very thoroughly, and Edison declared he did

not intend to build up a system of distribution in

which the external resistance would be equal to the

internal resistance. He said he was just about going

to do the opposite; he wanted a large external

resistance and a low internal one. He said he wanted

to sell the energy outside of the station and not waste

it in the dynamo and conductors, where it brought

no profits.... In these later days, when these ideas

of Edison are used as common property, and are applied

in every modern system of distribution, it is

astonishing to remember that when they were

propounded they met with most vehement antagonism

from the world at large." Edison, familiar with batteries

in telegraphy, could not bring himself to believe

that any substitute generator of electrical energy

could be efficient that used up half its own possible

output before doing an equal amount of outside

work.



Undaunted by the dicta of contemporaneous

science, Mr. Edison attacked the dynamo problem

with his accustomed vigor and thoroughness. He

chose the drum form for his armature, and experimented

with different kinds of iron. Cores were made

of cast iron, others of forged iron; and still others of

sheets of iron of various thicknesses separated from

each other by paper or paint. These cores were then

allowed to run in an excited field, and after a given

time their temperature was measured and noted.

By such practical methods Edison found that the

thin, laminated cores of sheet iron gave the least

heat, and had the least amount of wasteful eddy

currents. His experiments and ideas on magnetism

at that period were far in advance of the time. His

work and tests regarding magnetism were repeated

later on by Hopkinson and Kapp, who then elucidated

the whole theory mathematically by means of

formulae and constants. Before this, however, Edison

had attained these results by pioneer work, founded

on his original reasoning, and utilized them in the

construction of his dynamo, thus revolutionizing the

art of building such machines.



After thorough investigation of the magnetic qualities

of different kinds of iron, Edison began to make

a study of winding the cores, first determining the

electromotive force generated per turn of wire at

various speeds in fields of different intensities. He

also considered various forms and shapes for the armature,

and by methodical and systematic research obtained

the data and best conditions upon which he

could build his generator. In the field magnets of

his dynamo he constructed the cores and yoke of

forged iron having a very large cross-section, which

was a new thing in those days. Great attention was

also paid to all the joints, which were smoothed down

so as to make a perfect magnetic contact. The Edison

dynamo, with its large masses of iron, was a vivid

contrast to the then existing types with their meagre

quantities of the ferric element. Edison also made

tests on his field magnets by slowly raising the strength

of the exciting current, so that he obtained figures

similar to those shown by a magnetic curve, and in

this way found where saturation commenced, and

where it was useless to expend more current on the

field. If he had asked Upton at the time to formulate

the results of his work in this direction, for publication,

he would have anticipated the historic work

on magnetism that was executed by the two other

investigators; Hopkinson and Kapp, later on.



The laboratory note-books of the period bear

abundant evidence of the systematic and searching

nature of these experiments and investigations, in the

hundreds of pages of notes, sketches, calculations,

and tables made at the time by Edison, Upton,

Batchelor, Jehl, and by others who from time to time

were intrusted with special experiments to elucidate

some particular point. Mr. Jehl says: "The experiments

on armature-winding were also very interesting.

Edison had a number of small wooden cores

made, at both ends of which we inserted little brass

nails, and we wound the wooden cores with twine as if

it were wire on an armature. In this way we studied

armature-winding, and had matches where each of us

had a core, while bets were made as to who would be

the first to finish properly and correctly a certain

kind of winding. Care had to be taken that the

wound core corresponded to the direction of the current,

supposing it were placed in a field and revolved.

After Edison had decided this question, Upton made

drawings and tables from which the real armatures

were wound and connected to the commutator. To

a student of to-day all this seems simple, but in those

days the art of constructing dynamos was about as

dark as air navigation is at present.... Edison also

improved the armature by dividing it and the commutator

into a far greater number of sections than

up to that time had been the practice. He was also

the first to use mica in insulating the commutator

sections from each other."



In the mean time, during the progress of the

investigations on the dynamo, word had gone out to

the world that Edison expected to invent a generator

of greater efficiency than any that existed at the

time. Again he was assailed and ridiculed by the

technical press, for had not the foremost electricians

and physicists of Europe and America worked for

years on the production of dynamos and arc lamps

as they then existed? Even though this young man

at Menlo Park had done some wonderful things for

telegraphy and telephony; even if he had recorded

and reproduced human speech, he had his limitations,

and could not upset the settled dictum of science

that the internal resistance must equal the external

resistance.



Such was the trend of public opinion at the time,

but "after Mr. Kruesi had finished the first practical

dynamo, and after Mr. Upton had tested it thoroughly

and verified his figures and results several times--

for he also was surprised--Edison was able to tell

the world that he had made a generator giving an

efficiency of 90 per cent." Ninety per cent. as against

40 per cent. was a mighty hit, and the world would

not believe it. Criticism and argument were again at

their height, while Upton, as Edison's duellist, was

kept busy replying to private and public challenges

of the fact.... "The tremendous progress of the world

in the last quarter of a century, owing to the revolution

caused by the all-conquering march of `Heavy

Current Engineering,' is the outcome of Edison's work

at Menlo Park that raised the efficiency of the dynamo

from 40 per cent. to 90 per cent."



Mr. Upton sums it all up very precisely in his remarks

upon this period: "What has now been made

clear by accurate nomenclature was then very foggy

in the text-books. Mr. Edison had completely

grasped the effect of subdivision of circuits, and the

influence of wires leading to such subdivisions, when

it was most difficult to express what he knew in

technical language. I remember distinctly when Mr.

Edison gave me the problem of placing a motor in

circuit in multiple arc with a fixed resistance; and I

had to work out the problem entirely, as I could find

no prior solution. There was nothing I could find

bearing upon the counter electromotive force of the

armature, and the effect of the resistance of the

armature on the work given out by the armature.

It was a wonderful experience to have problems given

me out of the intuitions of a great mind, based on

enormous experience in practical work, and applying

to new lines of progress. One of the main impressions

left upon me after knowing Mr. Edison for many

years is the marvellous accuracy of his guesses. He

will see the general nature of a result long before it

can be reached by mathematical calculation. His

greatness was always to be clearly seen when difficulties

arose. They always made him cheerful, and

started him thinking; and very soon would come a

line of suggestions which would not end until the

difficulty was met and overcome, or found

insurmountable. I have often felt that Mr. Edison got

himself purposely into trouble by premature publications

and otherwise, so that he would have a full

incentive to get himself out of the trouble."



This chapter may well end with a statement from

Mr. Jehl, shrewd and observant, as a participator in

all the early work of the development of the Edison

lighting system: "Those who were gathered around

him in the old Menlo Park laboratory enjoyed his

confidence, and he theirs. Nor was this confidence

ever abused. He was respected with a respect which

only great men can obtain, and he never showed by

any word or act that he was their employer in a sense

that would hurt the feelings, as is often the case in

the ordinary course of business life. He conversed,

argued, and disputed with us all as if he were a colleague

on the same footing. It was his winning ways

and manners that attached us all so loyally to his

side, and made us ever ready with a boundless devotion

to execute any request or desire." Thus does

a great magnet, run through a heap of sand and

filings, exert its lines of force and attract irresistibly

to itself the iron and steel particles that are its

affinity, and having sifted them out, leaving the useless

dust behind, hold them to itself with responsive

tenacity.


