




CHAPTER VIII



AUTOMATIC, DUPLEX, AND QUADRUPLEX

TELEGRAPHY



WORK of various kinds poured in upon the young

manufacturer, busy also with his own schemes

and inventions, which soon began to follow so many

distinct lines of inquiry that it ceases to be easy or

necessary for the historian to treat them all in

chronological sequence. Some notion of his ceaseless

activity may be formed from the fact that he started no

fewer than three shops in Newark during 1870-71,

and while directing these was also engaged by the

men who controlled the Automatic Telegraph Company

of New York, which had a circuit to Washington,

to help it out of its difficulties. "Soon after

starting the large shop (10 and 12 Ward Street,

Newark), I rented shop-room to the inventor of a

new rifle. I think it was the Berdan. In any event,

it was a rifle which was subsequently adopted by the

British Army. The inventor employed a tool-maker

who was the finest and best tool-maker I had ever

seen. I noticed that he worked pretty near the

whole of the twenty-four hours. This kind of application

I was looking for. He was getting $21.50 per

week, and was also paid for overtime. I asked him

if he could run the shop. `I don't know; try me!' he

said. `All right, I will give you $60 per week to run

both shifts.' He went at it. His executive ability

was greater than that of any other man I have yet

seen. His memory was prodigious, conversation

laconic, and movements rapid. He doubled the production

inside three months, without materially increasing

the pay-roll, by increasing the cutting speeds

of tools, and by the use of various devices. When in

need of rest he would lie down on a work-bench,

sleep twenty or thirty minutes, and wake up fresh.

As this was just what I could do, I naturally conceived

a great pride in having such a man in charge

of my work. But almost everything has trouble connected

with it. He disappeared one day, and although

I sent men everywhere that it was likely he

could be found, he was not discovered. After two

weeks he came into the factory in a terrible condition

as to clothes and face. He sat down and, turning to

me, said: `Edison, it's no use, this is the third time;

I can't stand prosperity. Put my salary back and

give me a job.' I was very sorry to learn that it was

whiskey that spoiled such a career. I gave him an

inferior job and kept him for a long time."



Edison had now entered definitely upon that career

as an inventor which has left so deep an imprint on

the records of the United States Patent Office, where

from his first patent in 1869 up to the summer of 1910

no fewer than 1328 separate patents have been applied

for in his name, averaging thirty-two every

year, and one about every eleven days; with a

substantially corresponding number issued. The

height of this inventive activity was attained

about 1882, in which year no fewer than 141 pat-

ents were applied for, and seventy-five granted to

him, or nearly nine times as many as in 1876, when

invention as a profession may be said to have been

adopted by this prolific genius. It will be understood,

of course, that even these figures do not represent

the full measure of actual invention, as in every

process and at every step there were many discoveries

that were not brought to patent registration, but

remained "trade secrets." And furthermore, that in

practically every case the actual patented invention

followed from one to a dozen or more gradually developing

forms of the same idea.



An Englishman named George Little had brought

over a system of automatic telegraphy which worked

well on a short line, but was a failure when put upon

the longer circuits for which automatic methods are

best adapted. The general principle involved in

automatic or rapid telegraphs, except the photographic

ones, is that of preparing the message in

advance, for dispatch, by perforating narrow strips of

paper with holes--work which can be done either by

hand-punches or by typewriter apparatus. A certain

group of perforations corresponds to a Morse

group of dots and dashes for a letter of the alphabet.

When the tape thus made ready is run rapidly through

a transmitting machine, electrical contact occurs

wherever there is a perforation, permitting the current

from the battery to flow into the line and thus

transmit signals correspondingly. At the distant end

these signals are received sometimes on an ink-writing

recorder as dots and dashes, or even as typewriting

letters; but in many of the earlier systems, like that

of Bain, the record at the higher rates of speed was

effected by chemical means, a tell-tale stain being

made on the travelling strip of paper by every spurt

of incoming current. Solutions of potassium iodide

were frequently used for this purpose, giving a sharp,

blue record, but fading away too rapidly.



The Little system had perforating apparatus operated

by electromagnets; its transmitting machine

was driven by a small electromagnetic motor; and

the record was made by electrochemical decomposition,

the writing member being a minute platinum

roller instead of the more familiar iron stylus. Moreover,

a special type of wire had been put up for the

single circuit of two hundred and eighty miles between

New York and Washington. This is believed to have

been the first "compound" wire made for telegraphic

or other signalling purposes, the object being to secure

greater lightness with textile strength and high

conductivity. It had a steel core, with a copper ribbon

wound spirally around it, and tinned to the core wire.

But the results obtained were poor, and in their

necessity the parties in interest turned to Edison.



Mr. E. H. Johnson tells of the conditions: "Gen.

W. J. Palmer and some New York associates had

taken up the Little automatic system and had expended

quite a sum in its development, when, thinking

they had reduced it to practice, they got Tom

Scott, of the Pennsylvania Railroad to send his

superintendent of telegraph over to look into and

report upon it. Of course he turned it down. The

syndicate was appalled at this report, and in this

extremity General Palmer thought of the man who

had impressed him as knowing it all by the telling

of telegraphic tales as a means of whiling away lonesome

hours on the plains of Colorado, where they

were associated in railroad-building. So this man--

it was I--was sent for to come to New York and

assuage their grief if possible. My report was that

the system was sound fundamentally, that it contained

the germ of a good thing, but needed working

out. Associated with General Palmer was one Col.

Josiah C. Reiff, then Eastern bond agent for the

Kansas Pacific Railroad. The Colonel was always

resourceful, and didn't fail in this case. He knew of

a young fellow who was doing some good work for

Marshall Lefferts, and who it was said was a genius

at invention, and a very fiend for work. His name

was Edison, and he had a shop out at Newark, New

Jersey. He came and was put in my care for the

purpose of a mutual exchange of ideas and for a report

by me as to his competency in the matter. This was

my introduction to Edison. He confirmed my views

of the automatic system. He saw its possibilities,

as well as the chief obstacles to be overcome--viz.,

the sluggishness of the wire, together with the need

of mechanical betterment of the apparatus; and he

agreed to take the job on one condition--namely,

that Johnson would stay and help, as `he was a man

with ideas.' Mr. Johnson was accordingly given

three months' leave from Colorado railroad-building,

and has never seen Colorado since."



Applying himself to the difficulties with wonted

energy, Edison devised new apparatus, and solved

the problem to such an extent that he and his as-

sistants succeeded in transmitting and recording one

thousand words per minute between New York and

Washington, and thirty-five hundred words per

minute to Philadelphia. Ordinary manual transmission

by key is not in excess of forty to fifty words

a minute. Stated very briefly, Edison's principal

contribution to the commercial development of the

automatic was based on the observation that in a

line of considerable length electrical impulses become

enormously extended, or sluggish, due to a

phenomenon known as self-induction, which with

ordinary Morse work is in a measure corrected

by condensers. But in the automatic the aim was

to deal with impulses following each other from

twenty-five to one hundred times as rapidly as in

Morse lines, and to attempt to receive and record

intelligibly such a lightning-like succession of signals would

have seemed impossible. But Edison discovered that

by utilizing a shunt around the receiving instrument,

with a soft iron core, the self-induction would produce

a momentary and instantaneous reversal of the

current at the end of each impulse, and thereby give

an absolutely sharp definition to each signal. This

discovery did away entirely with sluggishness, and

made it possible to secure high speeds over lines of

comparatively great lengths. But Edison's work on

the automatic did not stop with this basic suggestion,

for he took up and perfected the mechanical construction

of the instruments, as well as the perforators,

and also suggested numerous electrosensitive

chemicals for the receivers, so that the automatic

telegraph, almost entirely by reason of his individual

work, was placed on a plane of commercial practicability.

The long line of patents secured by him

in this art is an interesting exhibit of the development

of a germ to a completed system, not, as is

usually the case, by numerous inventors working

over considerable periods of time, but by one man

evolving the successive steps at a white heat of

activity.



This system was put in commercial operation, but

the company, now encouraged, was quite willing to

allow Edison to work out his idea of an automatic

that would print the message in bold Roman letters

instead of in dots and dashes; with consequent gain

in speed in delivery of the message after its receipt

in the operating-room, it being obviously necessary

in the case of any message received in Morse characters

to copy it in script before delivery to the recipient.

A large shop was rented in Newark, equipped with

$25,000 worth of machinery, and Edison was given

full charge. Here he built their original type of

apparatus, as improved, and also pushed his experiments

on the letter system so far that at a test, between

New York and Philadelphia, three thousand words

were sent in one minute and recorded in Roman type.

Mr. D. N. Craig, one of the early organizers of the

Associated Press, became interested in this company,

whose president was Mr. George Harrington, formerly

Assistant Secretary of the United States Treasury.



Mr. Craig brought with him at this time--the early

seventies--from Milwaukee a Mr. Sholes, who had a

wooden model of a machine to which had been given the

then new and unfamiliar name of "typewriter." Craig

was interested in the machine, and put the model in

Edison's hands to perfect. "This typewriter proved a

difficult thing," says Edison, "to make commercial.

The alignment of the letters was awful. One letter

would be one-sixteenth of an inch above the others;

and all the letters wanted to wander out of line. I

worked on it till the machine gave fair results.[3] Some

were made and used in the office of the Automatic

company. Craig was very sanguine that some day all

business letters would be written on a typewriter.

He died before that took place; but it gradually

made its way. The typewriter I got into commercial

shape is now known as the Remington. About this

time I got an idea I could devise an apparatus by

which four messages could simultaneously be sent

over a single wire without interfering with each other.

I now had five shops, and with experimenting on this

new scheme I was pretty busy; at least I did not

have ennui."





[3] See illustration on opposite page, showing reproduction of the

work done with this machine.





A very interesting picture of Mr. Edison at this time

is furnished by Mr. Patrick B. Delany, a well-known

inventor in the field of automatic and multiplex

telegraphy, who at that time was a chief operator of the

Franklin Telegraph Company at Philadelphia. His

remark about Edison that "his ingenuity inspired

confidence, and wavering financiers stiffened up when

it became known that he was to develop the automatic"

is a noteworthy evidence of the manner in

which the young inventor had already gained a firm

footing. He continues: "Edward H. Johnson was

brought on from the Denver & Rio Grande Railway

to assist in the practical introduction of automatic

telegraphy on a commercial basis, and about this

time, in 1872, I joined the enterprise. Fairly good

results were obtained between New York and Washington,

and Edison, indifferent to theoretical difficulties,

set out to prove high speeds between New

York and Charleston, South Carolina, the compound

wire being hitched up to one of the Southern &

Atlantic wires from Washington to Charleston for

the purpose of experimentation. Johnson and I

went to the Charleston end to carry out Edison's

plans, which were rapidly unfolded by telegraph

every night from a loft on lower Broadway, New

York. We could only get the wire after all business

was cleared, usually about midnight, and for months,

in the quiet hours, that wire was subjected to more

electrical acrobatics than any other wire ever

experienced. When the experiments ended, Edison's

system was put into regular commercial operation

between New York and Washington; and did fine

work. If the single wire had not broken about every

other day, the venture would have been a financial

success; but moisture got in between the copper ribbon

and the steel core, setting up galvanic action

which made short work of the steel. The demonstration

was, however, sufficiently successful to impel

Jay Gould to contract to pay about $4,000,000 in stock

for the patents. The contract was never completed so

far as the $4,000,000 were concerned, but Gould made

good use of it in getting control of the Western Union."



One of the most important persons connected with

the automatic enterprise was Mr. George Harrington,

to whom we have above referred, and with whom Mr.

Edison entered into close confidential relations, so

that the inventions made were held jointly, under a

partnership deed covering "any inventions or

improvements that may be useful or desired in

automatic telegraphy." Mr. Harrington was assured at

the outset by Edison that while the Little perforator

would give on the average only seven or eight words

per minute, which was not enough for commercial

purposes, he could devise one giving fifty or sixty

words, and that while the Little solution for the

receiving tape cost $15 to $17 per gallon, he could

furnish a ferric solution costing only five or six cents

per gallon. In every respect Edison "made good,"

and in a short time the system was a success, "Mr.

Little having withdrawn his obsolete perforator, his

ineffective resistance, his costly chemical solution, to

give place to Edison's perforator, Edison's resistance

and devices, and Edison's solution costing a few cents

per gallon. But," continues Mr. Harrington, in a

memorable affidavit, "the inventive efforts of Mr.

Edison were not confined to automatic telegraphy,

nor did they cease with the opening of that line to

Washington." They all led up to the quadruplex.



Flattered by their success, Messrs. Harrington and

Reiff, who owned with Edison the foreign patents for

the new automatic system, entered into an arrangement

with the British postal telegraph authorities

for a trial of the system in England, involving its

probable adoption if successful. Edison was sent to

England to make the demonstration, in 1873, reporting

there to Col. George E. Gouraud, who had been

an associate in the United States Treasury with Mr.

Harrington, and was now connected with the new

enterprise. With one small satchel of clothes, three

large boxes of instruments, and a bright fellow-

telegrapher named Jack Wright, he took voyage on the

Jumping Java, as she was humorously known, of

the Cunard line. The voyage was rough and the

little Java justified her reputation by jumping all

over the ocean. "At the table," says Edison, "there

were never more than ten or twelve people. I wondered

at the time how it could pay to run an ocean

steamer with so few people; but when we got into

calm water and could see the green fields, I was

astounded to see the number of people who appeared.

There were certainly two or three hundred. I learned

afterward that they were mostly going to the Vienna

Exposition. Only two days could I get on deck, and

on one of these a gentleman had a bad scalp wound

from being thrown against the iron wall of a small

smoking-room erected over a freight hatch."



Arrived in London, Edison set up his apparatus at

the Telegraph Street headquarters, and sent his companion

to Liverpool with the instruments for that

end. The condition of the test was that he was to

send from Liverpool and receive in London, and to

record at the rate of one thousand words per minute,

five hundred words to be sent every half hour for six

hours. Edison was given a wire and batteries to

operate with, but a preliminary test soon showed that

he was going to fail. Both wire and batteries were

poor, and one of the men detailed by the authorities

to watch the test remarked quietly, in a friendly way:

"You are not going to have much show. They are

going to give you an old Bridgewater Canal wire that

is so poor we don't work it, and a lot of `sand batteries'

at Liverpool."[4] The situation was rather depressing

to the young American thus encountering,

for the first time, the stolid conservatism and opposition

to change that characterizes so much of official

life and methods in Europe. "I thanked him," says

Edison, "and hoped to reciprocate somehow. I knew

I was in a hole. I had been staying at a little hotel

in Covent Garden called the Hummums! and got

nothing but roast beef and flounders, and my imagination

was getting into a coma. What I needed was

pastry. That night I found a French pastry shop

in High Holborn Street and filled up. My imagination

got all right. Early in the morning I saw

Gouraud, stated my case, and asked if he would stand

for the purchase of a powerful battery to send to

Liverpool. He said `Yes.' I went immediately to

Apps on the Strand and asked if he had a powerful

battery. He said he hadn't; that all that he had

was Tyndall's Royal Institution battery, which he

supposed would not serve. I saw it--one hundred

cells--and getting the price--one hundred guineas--

hurried to Gouraud. He said `Go ahead.' I telegraphed

to the man in Liverpool. He came on, got

the battery to Liverpool, set up and ready, just two

hours before the test commenced. One of the principal

things that made the system a success was that

the line was put to earth at the sending end through

a magnet, and the extra current from this, passed to

the line, served to sharpen the recording waves. This

new battery was strong enough to pass a powerful

current through the magnet without materially

diminishing the strength of the line current."





[4] The sand battery is now obsolete. In this type, the cell

containing the elements was filled with sand, which was kept moist

with an electrolyte.





The test under these more favorable circumstances

was a success. "The record was as perfect as copper

plate, and not a single remark was made in the `time

lost' column." Edison was now asked if he thought

he could get a greater speed through submarine cables

with this system than with the regular methods, and

replied that he would like a chance to try it. For

this purpose, twenty-two hundred miles of Brazilian

cable then stored under water in tanks at the Greenwich

works of the Telegraph Construction & Maintenance

Company, near London, was placed at his

disposal from 8 P.M. until 6 A.M. "This just suited

me, as I preferred night-work. I got my apparatus

down and set up, and then to get a preliminary idea

of what the distortion of the signal would be, I sent

a single dot, which should have been recorded upon my

automatic paper by a mark about one-thirty-second of

an inch long. Instead of that it was twenty-seven feet

long! If I ever had any conceit, it vanished from

my boots up. I worked on this cable more than two

weeks, and the best I could do was two words per

minute, which was only one-seventh of what the

guaranteed speed of the cable should be when laid.

What I did not know at the time was that a coiled

cable, owing to induction, was infinitely worse than

when laid out straight, and that my speed was as

good as, if not better than, with the regular system;

but no one told me this." While he was engaged on

these tests Colonel Gouraud came down one night to

visit him at the lonely works, spent a vigil with him,

and toward morning wanted coffee. There was only

one little inn near by, frequented by longshoremen and

employees from the soap-works and cement-factories

--a rough lot--and there at daybreak they went as

soon as the other customers had left for work. "The

place had a bar and six bare tables, and was simply

infested with roaches. The only things that I ever

could get were coffee made from burnt bread, with

brown molasses-cake. I ordered these for Gouraud.

The taste of the coffee, the insects, etc., were too

much. He fainted. I gave him a big dose of gin,

and this revived him. He went back to the works

and waited until six when the day men came, and

telegraphed for a carriage. He lost all interest in

the experiments after that, and I was ordered back

to America." Edison states, however, that the automatic

was finally adopted in England and used for

many years; indeed, is still in use there. But they

took whatever was needed from his system, and he

"has never had a cent from them."



Arduous work was at once resumed at home on

duplex and quadruplex telegraphy, just as though

there had been no intermission or discouragement

over dots twenty-seven feet long. A clue to his activity

is furnished in the fact that in 1872 he had

applied for thirty-eight patents in the class of teleg-

raphy, and twenty-five in 1873; several of these

being for duplex methods, on which he had experimented.

The earlier apparatus had been built several

years prior to this, as shown by a curious little

item of news that appeared in the Telegrapher of

January 30, 1869: "T. A. Edison has resigned his

situation in the Western Union office, Boston, and will

devote his time to bringing out his inventions."

Oh, the supreme, splendid confidence of youth! Six

months later, as we have seen, he had already made

his mark, and the same journal, in October, 1869,

could say: "Mr. Edison is a young man of the highest

order of mechanical talent, combined with good

scientific electrical knowledge and experience. He

has already invented and patented a number of

valuable and useful inventions, among which may

be mentioned the best instrument for double transmission

yet brought out." Not bad for a novice of

twenty-two. It is natural, therefore, after his

intervening work on indicators, stock tickers, automatic

telegraphs, and typewriters, to find him harking back

to duplex telegraphy, if, indeed, he can be said to have

dropped it in the interval. It has always been one of

the characteristic features of Edison's method of

inventing that work in several lines has gone forward

at the same time. No one line of investigation has

ever been enough to occupy his thoughts fully; or

to express it otherwise, he has found rest in turning

from one field of work to another, having absolutely

no recreations or hobbies, and not needing them. It

may also be said that, once entering it, Mr. Edison

has never abandoned any field of work. He may

change the line of attack; he may drop the subject

for a time; but sooner or later the note-books or the

Patent Office will bear testimony to the reminiscent

outcropping of latent thought on the matter. His

attention has shifted chronologically, and by process

of evolution, from one problem to another, and some

results are found to be final; but the interest of the

man in the thing never dies out. No one sees more

vividly than he the fact that in the interplay of the

arts one industry shapes and helps another, and that

no invention lives to itself alone.



The path to the quadruplex lay through work on

the duplex, which, suggested first by Moses G. Farmer

in 1852, had been elaborated by many ingenious

inventors, notably in this country by Stearns, before

Edison once again applied his mind to it. The different

methods of such multiple transmission--namely,

the simultaneous dispatch of the two communications

in opposite directions over the same wire, or the

dispatch of both at once in the same direction--gave

plenty of play to ingenuity. Prescott's Elements of

the Electric Telegraph, a standard work in its day,

described "a method of simultaneous transmission

invented by T. A. Edison, of New Jersey, in 1873,"

and says of it: "Its peculiarity consists in the fact

that the signals are transmitted in one direction by

reversing the polarity of a constant current, and in

the opposite direction by increasing or decreasing

the strength of the same current." Herein lay the

germ of the Edison quadruplex. It is also noted that

"In 1874 Edison invented a method of simultaneous

transmission by induced currents, which has given

very satisfactory results in experimental trials." Interest

in the duplex as a field of invention dwindled,

however, as the quadruplex loomed up, for while

the one doubled the capacity of a circuit, the latter

created three "phantom wires," and thus quadruplexed

the working capacity of any line to which

it was applied. As will have been gathered from the

above, the principle embodied in the quadruplex is

that of working over the line with two currents from

each end that differ from each other in strength or

nature, so that they will affect only instruments

adapted to respond to just such currents and no

others; and by so arranging the receiving apparatus

as not to be affected by the currents transmitted from

its own end of the line. Thus by combining instruments

that respond only to variation in the strength

of current from the distant station, with instruments

that respond only to the change in the direction of

current from the distant station, and by grouping a

pair of these at each end of the line, the quadruplex

is the result. Four sending and four receiving operators

are kept busy at each end, or eight in all. Aside

from other material advantages, it is estimated that

at least from $15,000,000 to $20,000,000 has been

saved by the Edison quadruplex merely in the cost

of line construction in America.



The quadruplex has not as a rule the same working

efficiency that four separate wires have. This is due

to the fact that when one of the receiving operators

is compelled to "break" the sending operator for any

reason, the "break" causes the interruption of the

work of eight operators, instead of two, as would be

the case on a single wire. The working efficiency of

the quadruplex, therefore, with the apparatus in good

working condition, depends entirely upon the skill

of the operators employed to operate it. But this

does not reflect upon or diminish the ingenuity required

for its invention. Speaking of the problem

involved, Edison said some years later to Mr. Upton,

his mathematical assistant, that "he always considered

he was only working from one room to another.

Thus he was not confused by the amount of wire and

the thought of distance."



The immense difficulties of reducing such a system

to practice may be readily conceived, especially when

it is remembered that the "line" itself, running across

hundreds of miles of country, is subject to all manner

of atmospheric conditions, and varies from moment

to moment in its ability to carry current, and also

when it is borne in mind that the quadruplex requires

at each end of the line a so-called "artificial line,"

which must have the exact resistance of the working

line and must be varied with the variations in resistance

of the working line. At this juncture other

schemes were fermenting in his brain; but the

quadruplex engrossed him. "This problem was of most

difficult and complicated kind, and I bent all my

energies toward its solution. It required a peculiar

effort of the mind, such as the imagining of eight

different things moving simultaneously on a mental

plane, without anything to demonstrate their

efficiency." It is perhaps hardly to be wondered at

that when notified he would have to pay 12 1/2 per cent.

extra if his taxes in Newark were not at once paid,

he actually forgot his own name when asked for it

suddenly at the City Hall, lost his place in the line,

and, the fatal hour striking, had to pay the surcharge

after all!



So important an invention as the quadruplex could

not long go begging, but there were many difficulties

connected with its introduction, some of which are

best described in Mr. Edison's own words: "Around

1873 the owners of the Automatic Telegraph Company

commenced negotiations with Jay Gould for

the purchase of the wires between New York and

Washington, and the patents for the system, then in

successful operation. Jay Gould at that time controlled

the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph Company,

and was competing with the Western Union and

endeavoring to depress Western Union stock on the

Exchange. About this time I invented the quadruplex.

I wanted to interest the Western Union Telegraph

Company in it, with a view of selling it, but

was unsuccessful until I made an arrangement with

the chief electrician of the company, so that he could

be known as a joint inventor and receive a portion of

the money. At that time I was very short of money,

and needed it more than glory. This electrician

appeared to want glory more than money, so it was an

easy trade. I brought my apparatus over and was

given a separate room with a marble-tiled floor,

which, by-the-way, was a very hard kind of floor to

sleep on, and started in putting on the finishing

touches.



"After two months of very hard work, I got a

detail at regular times of eight operators, and we

got it working nicely from one room to another over

a wire which ran to Albany and back. Under certain

conditions of weather, one side of the quadruplex

would work very shakily, and I had not succeeded

in ascertaining the cause of the trouble. On a certain

day, when there was a board meeting of the company,

I was to make an exhibition test. The day arrived.

I had picked the best operators in New York, and

they were familiar with the apparatus. I arranged

that if a storm occurred, and the bad side got shaky,

they should do the best they could and draw freely

on their imaginations. They were sending old messages.

About 1, o'clock everything went wrong, as

there was a storm somewhere near Albany, and the

bad side got shaky. Mr. Orton, the president, and

Wm. H. Vanderbilt and the other directors came in.

I had my heart trying to climb up around my oesophagus.

I was paying a sheriff five dollars a day to

withhold judgment which had been entered against

me in a case which I had paid no attention to; and if

the quadruplex had not worked before the president,

I knew I was to have trouble and might lose my

machinery. The New York Times came out next

day with a full account. I was given $5000 as part

payment for the invention, which made me easy, and

I expected the whole thing would be closed up. But

Mr. Orton went on an extended tour just about that

time. I had paid for all the experiments on the

quadruplex and exhausted the money, and I was

again in straits. In the mean time I had introduced

the apparatus on the lines of the company, where it

was very successful.



"At that time the general superintendent of the

Western Union was Gen. T. T. Eckert (who had been

Assistant Secretary of War with Stanton). Eckert

was secretly negotiating with Gould to leave the

Western Union and take charge of the Atlantic &

Pacific--Gould's company. One day Eckert called

me into his office and made inquiries about money

matters. I told him Mr. Orton had gone off and left

me without means, and I was in straits. He told me

I would never get another cent, but that he knew a

man who would buy it. I told him of my arrangement

with the electrician, and said I could not sell

it as a whole to anybody; but if I got enough for it,

I would sell all my interest in any SHARE I might have.

He seemed to think his party would agree to this. I

had a set of quadruplex over in my shop, 10 and 12

Ward Street, Newark, and he arranged to bring him

over next evening to see the apparatus. So the next

morning Eckert came over with Jay Gould and

introduced him to me. This was the first time I had

ever seen him. I exhibited and explained the

apparatus, and they departed. The next day Eckert

sent for me, and I was taken up to Gould's house,

which was near the Windsor Hotel, Fifth Avenue.

In the basement he had an office. It was in the

evening, and we went in by the servants' entrance,

as Eckert probably feared that he was watched.

Gould started in at once and asked me how much I

wanted. I said: `Make me an offer.' Then he said:

`I will give you $30,000.' I said: `I will sell any

interest I may have for that money,' which was something

more than I thought I could get. The next

morning I went with Gould to the office of his lawyers,

Sherman & Sterling, and received a check for

$30,000, with a remark by Gould that I had got the

steamboat Plymouth Rock, as he had sold her for

$30,000 and had just received the check. There

was a big fight on between Gould's company and the

Western Union, and this caused more litigation.

The electrician, on account of the testimony involved,

lost his glory. The judge never decided the case,

but went crazy a few months afterward." It was

obviously a characteristically shrewd move on the

part of Mr. Gould to secure an interest in the quadruplex,

as a factor in his campaign against the Western

Union, and as a decisive step toward his control of

that system, by the subsequent merger that included

not only the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph Company,

but the American Union Telegraph Company.



Nor was Mr. Gould less appreciative of the value of

Edison's automatic system. Referring to matters

that will be taken up later in the narrative, Edison

says: "After this Gould wanted me to help install the

automatic system in the Atlantic & Pacific company,

of which General Eckert had been elected president,

the company having bought the Automatic Telegraph

Company. I did a lot of work for this company

making automatic apparatus in my shop at Newark.

About this time I invented a district messenger call-

box system, and organized a company called the

Domestic Telegraph Company, and started in to install

the system in New York. I had great difficulty

in getting subscribers, having tried several canvassers,

who, one after the other, failed to get sub-

scribers. When I was about to give it up, a test

operator named Brown, who was on the Automatic

Telegraph wire between New York and Washington,

which passed through my Newark shop, asked permission

to let him try and see if he couldn't get subscribers.

I had very little faith in his ability to get

any, but I thought I would give him a chance, as he

felt certain of his ability to succeed. He started in,

and the results were surprising. Within a month he

had procured two hundred subscribers, and the company

was a success. I have never quite understood

why six men should fail absolutely, while the seventh

man should succeed. Perhaps hypnotism would

account for it. This company was sold out to the

Atlantic & Pacific company." As far back as 1872,

Edison had applied for a patent on district messenger

signal boxes, but it was not issued until

January, 1874, another patent being granted in

September of the same year. In this field of telegraph

application, as in others, Edison was a very early

comer, his only predecessor being the fertile and

ingenious Callahan, of stock-ticker fame. The first

president of the Gold & Stock Telegraph Company,

Elisha W. Andrews, had resigned in 1870 in order to

go to England to introduce the stock ticker in London.

He lived in Englewood, New Jersey, and the

very night he had packed his trunk the house was

burglarized. Calling on his nearest friend the next

morning for even a pair of suspenders, Mr. Andrews

was met with regrets of inability, because the burglars

had also been there. A third and fourth friend in

the vicinity was appealed to with the same dishearten-

ing reply of a story of wholesale spoliation. Mr.

Callahan began immediately to devise a system of

protection for Englewood; but at that juncture a

servant-girl who had been for many years with a

family on the Heights in Brooklyn went mad suddenly

and held an aged widow and her daughter as

helpless prisoners for twenty-four hours without

food or water. This incident led to an extension of

the protective idea, and very soon a system was

installed in Brooklyn with one hundred subscribers.

Out of this grew in turn the district messenger system,

for it was just as easy to call a messenger as to sound

a fire-alarm or summon the police. To-day no large

city in America is without a service of this character,

but its function was sharply limited by the introduction

of the telephone.



Returning to the automatic telegraph it is interesting

to note that so long as Edison was associated with

it as a supervising providence it did splendid work,

which renders the later neglect of automatic or

"rapid telegraphy" the more remarkable. Reid's

standard Telegraph in America bears astonishing testimony

on this point in 1880, as follows: "The Atlantic

& Pacific Telegraph Company had twenty-two

automatic stations. These included the chief cities

on the seaboard, Buffalo, Chicago, and Omaha. The

through business during nearly two years was largely

transmitted in this way. Between New York and

Boston two thousand words a minute have been sent.

The perforated paper was prepared at the rate of

twenty words per minute. Whatever its demerits

this system enabled the Atlantic & Pacific company

to handle a much larger business during 1875 and 1876

than it could otherwise have done with its limited

number of wires in their then condition." Mr. Reid

also notes as a very thorough test of the perfect

practicability of the system, that it handled the

President's message, December 3, 1876, of 12,600 words

with complete success. This long message was filed

at Washington at 1.05 and delivered in New York at

2.07. The first 9000 words were transmitted in

forty-five minutes. The perforated strips were prepared

in thirty minutes by ten persons, and duplicated

by nine copyists. But to-day, nearly thirty-

five years later, telegraphy in America is still

practically on a basis of hand transmission!



Of this period and his association with Jay Gould,

some very interesting glimpses are given by Edison.

"While engaged in putting in the automatic system,

I saw a great deal of Gould, and frequently went

uptown to his office to give information. Gould had

no sense of humor. I tried several times to get off

what seemed to me a funny story, but he failed to see

any humor in them. I was very fond of stories, and

had a choice lot, always kept fresh, with which I

could usually throw a man into convulsions. One

afternoon Gould started in to explain the great future

of the Union Pacific Railroad, which he then controlled.

He got a map, and had an immense amount

of statistics. He kept at it for over four hours, and

got very enthusiastic. Why he should explain to me,

a mere inventor, with no capital or standing, I couldn't

make out. He had a peculiar eye, and I made up

my mind that there was a strain of insanity some-

where. This idea was strengthened shortly afterward

when the Western Union raised the monthly

rental of the stock tickers. Gould had one in his

house office, which he watched constantly. This he

had removed, to his great inconvenience, because the

price had been advanced a few dollars! He railed over

it. This struck me as abnormal. I think Gould's

success was due to abnormal development. He certainly

had one trait that all men must have who want

to succeed. He collected every kind of information

and statistics about his schemes, and had all the

data. His connection with men prominent in official

life, of which I was aware, was surprising to me. His

conscience seemed to be atrophied, but that may be

due to the fact that he was contending with men

who never had any to be atrophied. He worked incessantly

until 12 or 1 o'clock at night. He took no

pride in building up an enterprise. He was after

money, and money only. Whether the company

was a success or a failure mattered not to him. After

he had hammered the Western Union through his

opposition company and had tired out Mr. Vanderbilt,

the latter retired from control, and Gould went

in and consolidated his company and controlled the

Western Union. He then repudiated the contract

with the Automatic Telegraph people, and they never

received a cent for their wires or patents, and I lost

three years of very hard labor. But I never had any

grudge against him, because he was so able in his line,

and as long as my part was successful the money with

me was a secondary consideration. When Gould got

the Western Union I knew no further progress in

telegraphy was possible, and I went into other lines."

The truth is that General Eckert was a conservative

--even a reactionary--and being prejudiced like many

other American telegraph managers against "machine

telegraphy," threw out all such improvements.



The course of electrical history has been variegated

by some very remarkable litigation; but none

was ever more extraordinary than that referred to

here as arising from the transfer of the Automatic

Telegraph Company to Mr. Jay Gould and the

Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph Company. The terms

accepted by Colonel Reiff from Mr. Gould, on December

30, 1874, provided that the purchasing telegraph

company should increase its capital to $15,000,000,

of which the Automatic interests were to receive

$4,000,000 for their patents, contracts, etc. The

stock was then selling at about 25, and in the later

consolidation with the Western Union "went in"

at about 60; so that the real purchase price was not


less than $1,000,000 in cash. There was a private

arrangement in writing with Mr. Gould that he was

to receive one-tenth of the "result" to the Automatic

group, and a tenth of the further results secured

at home and abroad. Mr. Gould personally bought

up and gave money and bonds for one or two individual

interests on the above basis, including that

of Harrington, who in his representative capacity

executed assignments to Mr. Gould. But payments

were then stopped, and the other owners were left

without any compensation, although all that belonged

to them in the shape of property and patents

was taken over bodily into Atlantic & Pacific hands,

and never again left them. Attempts at settlement

were made in their behalf, and dragged wearily,

due apparently to the fact that the plans were

blocked by General Eckert, who had in some

manner taken offence at a transaction effected

without his active participation in all the details.

Edison, who became under the agreement the electrician

of the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph Company,

has testified to the unfriendly attitude assumed toward

him by General Eckert, as president. In a

graphic letter from Menlo Park to Mr. Gould, dated

February 2, 1877, Edison makes a most vigorous and

impassioned complaint of his treatment, "which,

acting cumulatively, was a long, unbroken

disappointment to me"; and he reminds Mr. Gould of

promises made to him the day the transfer had been

effected of Edison's interest in the quadruplex. The

situation was galling to the busy, high-spirited young

inventor, who, moreover, "had to live"; and it led

to his resumption of work for the Western Union

Telegraph Company, which was only too glad to get

him back. Meantime, the saddened and perplexed

Automatic group was left unpaid, and it was not

until 1906, on a bill filed nearly thirty years before,

that Judge Hazel, in the United States Circuit Court for

the Southern District of New York, found strongly

in favor of the claimants and ordered an accounting.

The court held that there had been a most wrongful

appropriation of the patents, including alike those

relating to the automatic, the duplex, and the quadruplex,

all being included in the general arrangement

under which Mr. Gould had held put his tempting

bait of $4,000,000. In the end, however, the complainant

had nothing to show for all his struggle,

as the master who made the accounting set the

damages at one dollar!



Aside from the great value of the quadruplex,

saving millions of dollars, for a share in which Edison

received $30,000, the automatic itself is described

as of considerable utility by Sir William Thomson

in his juror report at the Centennial Exposition of

1876, recommending it for award. This leading

physicist of his age, afterward Lord Kelvin, was an

adept in telegraphy, having made the ocean cable

talk, and he saw in Edison's "American Automatic,"

as exhibited by the Atlantic & Pacific company, a

most meritorious and useful system. With the aid

of Mr. E. H. Johnson he made exhaustive tests, carrying

away with him to Glasgow University the surprising

records that he obtained. His official report

closes thus: "The electromagnetic shunt with soft

iron core, invented by Mr. Edison, utilizing Professor

Henry's discovery of electromagnetic induction in a

single circuit to produce a momentary reversal of the

line current at the instant when the battery is thrown

off and so cut off the chemical marks sharply at the

proper instant, is the electrical secret of the great

speed he has achieved. The main peculiarities of

Mr. Edison's automatic telegraph shortly stated in

conclusion are: (1) the perforator; (2) the contact-

maker; (3) the electromagnetic shunt; and (4) the

ferric cyanide of iron solution. It deserves award as

a very important step in land telegraphy." The attitude

thus disclosed toward Mr. Edison's work was

never changed, except that admiration grew as fresh

inventions were brought forward. To the day of his

death Lord Kelvin remained on terms of warmest

friendship with his American co-laborer, with whose

genius he thus first became acquainted at Philadelphia

in the environment of Franklin.



It is difficult to give any complete idea of the activity

maintained at the Newark shops during these

anxious, harassed years, but the statement that at

one time no fewer than forty-five different inventions

were being worked upon, will furnish some notion of

the incandescent activity of the inventor and his

assistants. The hours were literally endless; and

upon one occasion, when the order was in hand for

a large quantity of stock tickers, Edison locked his

men in until the job had been finished of making

the machine perfect, and "all the bugs taken out,"

which meant sixty hours of unintermitted struggle

with the difficulties. Nor were the problems and inventions

all connected with telegraphy. On the contrary,

Edison's mind welcomed almost any new suggestion

as a relief from the regular work in hand.

Thus: "Toward the latter part of 1875, in the Newark

shop, I invented a device for multiplying copies of

letters, which I sold to Mr. A. B. Dick, of Chicago,

and in the years since it has been universally introduced

throughout the world. It is called the `Mimeograph.'

I also invented devices for and introduced

paraffin paper, now used universally for wrapping up

candy, etc." The mimeograph employs a pointed

stylus, used as in writing with a lead-pencil, which

is moved over a kind of tough prepared paper placed

on a finely grooved steel plate. The writing is thus

traced by means of a series of minute perforations in

the sheet, from which, as a stencil, hundreds of copies

can be made. Such stencils can be prepared on

typewriters. Edison elaborated this principle in two

other forms--one pneumatic and one electric--the

latter being in essence a reciprocating motor. Inside

the barrel of the electric pen a little plunger, carrying

the stylus, travels to and fro at a very high rate

of speed, due to the attraction and repulsion of the

solenoid coils of wire surrounding it; and as the hand

of the writer guides it the pen thus makes its record

in a series of very minute perforations in the paper.

The current from a small battery suffices to energize

the pen, and with the stencil thus made hundreds of

copies of the document can be furnished. As a matter

of fact, as many as three thousand copies have been

made from a single mimeographic stencil of this

character.

