





CHAPTER VI



WORK AND INVENTION IN BOSTON



MILTON ADAMS was working in the office of the

Franklin Telegraph Company in Boston when

he received Edison's appeal from Port Huron, and

with characteristic impetuosity at once made it his

business to secure a position for his friend. There

was no opening in the Franklin office, so Adams went

over to the Western Union office, and asked the manager,

Mr. George F. Milliken, if he did not want an

operator who, like young Lochinvar, came out of the

West. "What kind of copy does he make?" was the

cautious response. "I passed Edison's letter through

the window for his inspection. Milliken read it, and

a look of surprise came over his countenance as he

asked me if he could take it off the line like that. I

said he certainly could, and that there was nobody

who could stick him. Milliken said that if he was that

kind of an operator I could send for him, and I wrote

to Edison to come on, as I had a job for him in the

main office of the Western Union." Meantime Edison

had secured his pass over the Grand Trunk Railroad,

and spent four days and nights on the journey, suffering

extremes of cold and hunger. Franklin's arrival

in Philadelphia finds its parallel in the very modest

debut of Adams's friend in Boston.



It took only five minutes for Edison to get the

"job," for Superintendent Milliken, a fine type of

telegraph official, saw quickly through the superficialities,

and realized that it was no ordinary young

operator he was engaging. Edison himself tells the

story of what happened. "The manager asked me

when I was ready to go to work. `Now,' I replied

I was then told to return at 5.30 P.M., and punctually

at that hour I entered the main operating-room and

was introduced to the night manager. The weather

being cold, and being clothed poorly, my peculiar

appearance caused much mirth, and, as I afterward

learned, the night operators had consulted together

how they might `put up a job on the jay from the

woolly West.' I was given a pen and assigned to

the New York No. 1 wire. After waiting an hour,

I was told to come over to a special table and take a

special report for the Boston Herald, the conspirators

having arranged to have one of the fastest senders

in New York send the despatch and `salt' the new

man. I sat down unsuspiciously at the table, and

the New York man started slowly. Soon he increased

his speed, to which I easily adapted my

pace. This put my rival on his mettle, and he put

on his best powers, which, however, were soon reached.

At this point I happened to look up, and saw the

operators all looking over my shoulder, with their

faces shining with fun and excitement. I knew then

that they were trying to put up a job on me, but

kept my own counsel. The New York man then

commenced to slur over his words, running them together

and sticking the signals; but I had been used

to this style of telegraphy in taking report, and was

not in the least discomfited. Finally, when I thought

the fun had gone far enough, and having about completed

the special, I quietly opened the key and remarked,

telegraphically, to my New York friend:

`Say, young man, change off and send with your

other foot.' This broke the New York man all up,

and he turned the job over to another man to finish."



Edison had a distaste for taking press report, due

to the fact that it was steady, continuous work, and

interfered with the studies and investigations that

could be carried on in the intervals of ordinary

commercial telegraphy. He was not lazy in any sense.

While he had no very lively interest in the mere

routine work of a telegraph office, he had the profoundest

curiosity as to the underlying principles of

electricity that made telegraphy possible, and he

had an unflagging desire and belief in his own ability

to improve the apparatus he handled daily. The

whole intellectual atmosphere of Boston was favorable

to the development of the brooding genius in

this shy, awkward, studious youth, utterly indifferent

to clothes and personal appearance, but ready to

spend his last dollar on books and scientific

paraphernalia. It is matter of record that he did once

buy a new suit for thirty dollars in Boston, but the

following Sunday, while experimenting with acids in

his little workshop, the suit was spoiled. "That is

what I get for putting so much money in a new suit,"

was the laconic remark of the youth, who was more

than delighted to pick up a complete set of Faraday's

works about the same time. Adams says that when

Edison brought home these books at 4 A.M. he read

steadily until breakfast-time, and then he remarked,

enthusiastically: "Adams, I have got so much to do

and life is so short, I am going to hustle." And

thereupon he started on a run for breakfast. Edison

himself says: "It was in Boston I bought Faraday's

works. I think I must have tried about everything

in those books. His explanations were simple. He

used no mathematics. He was the Master Experimenter.

I don't think there were many copies of

Faraday's works sold in those days. The only people

who did anything in electricity were the

telegraphers and the opticians making simple school

apparatus to demonstrate the principles." One of

these firms was Palmer & Hall, whose catalogue of

1850 showed a miniature electric locomotive made

by Mr. Thomas Hall, and exhibited in operation the

following year at the Charitable Mechanics' Fair in

Boston. In 1852 Mr. Hall made for a Dr. A. L. Henderson,

of Buffalo, New York, a model line of railroad

with electric-motor engine, telegraph line, and electric

railroad signals, together with a figure operating the

signals at each end of the line automatically. This

was in reality the first example of railroad trains

moved by telegraph signals, a practice now so common

and universal as to attract no comment. To

show how little some fundamental methods can change

in fifty years, it may be noted that Hall conveyed the

current to his tiny car through forty feet of rail,

using the rail as conductor, just as Edison did more

than thirty years later in his historic experiments

for Villard at Menlo Park; and just as a large pro-

portion of American trolley systems do at this present

moment.



It was among such practical, investigating folk as

these that Edison was very much at home. Another

notable man of this stamp, with whom Edison was

thrown in contact, was the late Mr. Charles Williams,

who, beginning his career in the electrical field in

the forties, was at the height of activity as a maker

of apparatus when Edison arrived in the city; and

who afterward, as an associate of Alexander Graham

Bell, enjoyed the distinction of being the first

manufacturer in the world of telephones. At his Court

Street workshop Edison was a frequent visitor. Telegraph

repairs and experiments were going on constantly,

especially on the early fire-alarm telegraphs[1]

of Farmer and Gamewell, and with the aid of one of the

men there--probably George Anders--Edison worked

out into an operative model his first invention, a vote-

recorder, the first Edison patent, for which papers

were executed on October 11, 1868, and which was

taken out June 1, 1869, No. 90,646. The purpose of

this particular device was to permit a vote in the

National House of Representatives to be taken in a

minute or so, complete lists being furnished of all

members voting on the two sides of any question

Mr. Edison, in recalling the circumstances, says:

"Roberts was the telegraph operator who was the

financial backer to the extent of $100. The invention

when completed was taken to Washington. I think it

was exhibited before a committee that had something

to do with the Capitol. The chairman of the committee,

after seeing how quickly and perfectly it

worked, said: `Young man, if there is any invention

on earth that we don't want down here, it is this.

One of the greatest weapons in the hands of a minority

to prevent bad legislation is filibustering on

votes, and this instrument would prevent it.' I saw

the truth of this, because as press operator I had taken

miles of Congressional proceedings, and to this day

an enormous amount of time is wasted during each

session of the House in foolishly calling the members'

names and recording and then adding their

votes, when the whole operation could be done in

almost a moment by merely pressing a particular

button at each desk. For filibustering purposes,

however, the present methods are most admirable."

Edison determined from that time forth to devote

his inventive faculties only to things for which there

was a real, genuine demand, something that subserved

the actual necessities of humanity. This first

patent was taken out for him by the late Hon. Carroll

D. Wright, afterward U. S. Commissioner of Labor,

and a well-known publicist, then practicing patent law

in Boston. He describes Edison as uncouth in manner,

a chewer rather than a smoker of tobacco, but

full of intelligence and ideas.





[1] The general scheme of a fire-alarm telegraph system embodies

a central office to which notice can be sent from any number of

signal boxes of the outbreak of a fire in the district covered by

the box, the central office in turn calling out the nearest fire

engines, and warning the fire department in general of the

occurrence. Such fire alarms can be exchanged automatically, or

by operators, and are sometimes associated with a large fire-alarm

bell or whistle. Some boxes can be operated by the passing public;

others need special keys. The box mechanism is usually of

the ratchet, step-by-step movement, familiar in district messenger

call-boxes.







Edison's curiously practical, though imaginative,

mind demanded realities to work upon, things that

belong to "human nature's daily food," and he soon

harked back to telegraphy, a domain in which he

was destined to succeed, and over which he was to

reign supreme as an inventor. He did not, however,

neglect chemistry, but indulged his tastes in that

direction freely, although we have no record that this

work was anything more, at that time, than the

carrying out of experiments outlined in the books.

The foundations were being laid for the remarkable

chemical knowledge that later on grappled successfully

with so many knotty problems in the realm of

chemistry; notably with the incandescent lamp and

the storage battery. Of one incident in his chemical

experiments he tells the following story: "I had read

in a scientific paper the method of making nitroglycerine,

and was so fired by the wonderful properties

it was said to possess, that I determined to make

some of the compound. We tested what we considered

a very small quantity, but this produced such

terrible and unexpected results that we became

alarmed, the fact dawning upon us that we had a very

large white elephant in our possession. At 6 A.M. I

put the explosive into a sarsaparilla bottle, tied a

string to it, wrapped it in a paper, and gently let it

down into the sewer, corner of State and Washington

Streets." The associate in this was a man whom he

had found endeavoring to make electrical apparatus

for sleight-of-hand performances.



In the Boston telegraph office at that time, as perhaps

at others, there were operators studying to en-

ter college; possibly some were already in attendance

at Harvard University. This condition was not unusual

at one time; the first electrical engineer graduated

from Columbia University, New York, followed

up his studies while a night operator, and came out

brilliantly at the head of his class. Edison says of

these scholars that they paraded their knowledge

rather freely, and that it was his delight to go to the

second-hand book stores on Cornhill and study up

questions which he could spring upon them when he

got an occasion. With those engaged on night duty

he got midnight lunch from an old Irishman called

"the Cake Man," who appeared regularly with his

wares at 12 midnight. "The office was on the

ground floor, and had been a restaurant previous to

its occupation by the Western Union Telegraph

Company. It was literally loaded with cockroaches,

which lived between the wall and the board running

around the room at the floor, and which came after

the lunch. These were such a bother on my table that

I pasted two strips of tinfoil on the wall at my desk,

connecting one piece to the positive pole of the big

battery supplying current to the wires and the negative

pole to the other strip. The cockroaches moving

up on the wall would pass over the strips. The moment

they got their legs across both strips there was

a flash of light and the cockroaches went into gas.

This automatic electrocuting device attracted so much

attention, and got half a column in an evening paper,

that the manager made me stop it." The reader will

remember that a similar plan of campaign against

rats was carried out by Edison while in the West.



About this time Edison had a narrow escape from

injury that might easily have shortened his career,

and he seems to have provoked the trouble more or

less innocently by using a little elementary chemistry.

"After being in Boston several months," he says,

"working New York wire No. 1, I was requested to

work the press wire, called the `milk route,' as there

were so many towns on it taking press simultaneously.

New York office had reported great delays on the

wire, due to operators constantly interrupting, or

`breaking,' as it was called, to have words repeated

which they had failed to get; and New York claimed

that Boston was one of the worst offenders. It was

a rather hard position for me, for if I took the report

without breaking, it would prove the previous Boston

operator incompetent. The results made the

operator have some hard feelings against me. He

was put back on the wire, and did much better after

that. It seems that the office boy was down on this

man. One night he asked me if I could tell him how

to fix a key so that it would not `break,' even if the

circuit-breaker was open, and also so that it could not

be easily detected. I told him to jab a penful of

ink on the platinum points, as there was sugar enough

to make it sufficiently thick to hold up when the

operator tried to break--the current still going through

the ink so that he could not break.



"The next night about 1 A.M. this operator, on the

press wire, while I was standing near a House printer

studying it, pulled out a glass insulator, then used

upside down as a substitute for an ink-bottle, and

threw it with great violence at me, just missing my

head. It would certainly have killed me if it had

not missed. The cause of the trouble was that this

operator was doing the best he could not to break,

but being compelled to, opened his key and found he

couldn't. The press matter came right along, and

he could not stop it. The office boy had put the ink

in a few minutes before, when the operator had

turned his head during a lull. He blamed me instinctively

as the cause of the trouble. Later on we

became good friends. He took his meals at the same

emaciator that I did. His main object in life seemed

to be acquiring the art of throwing up wash-pitchers

and catching them without breaking them. About

one-third of his salary was used up in paying for

pitchers."



One day a request reached the Western Union

Telegraph office in Boston, from the principal of a

select school for young ladies, to the effect that she

would like some one to be sent up to the school to

exhibit and describe the Morse telegraph to her

"children." There has always been a warm interest

in Boston in the life and work of Morse, who was born

there, at Charlestown, barely a mile from the birthplace

of Franklin, and this request for a little lecture

on Morse's telegraph was quite natural. Edison, who

was always ready to earn some extra money for his

experiments, and was already known as the best-

informed operator in the office, accepted the

invitation. What happened is described by Adams as

follows: "We gathered up a couple of sounders, a

battery, and sonic wire, and at the appointed time

called on her to do the stunt. Her school-room was

about twenty by twenty feet, not including a small

platform. We rigged up the line between the two

ends of the room, Edison taking the stage while I

was at the other end of the room. All being in

readiness, the principal was told to bring in her


children. The door opened and in came about twenty

young ladies elegantly gowned, not one of whom was

under seventeen. When Edison saw them I thought

he would faint. He called me on the line and asked

me to come to the stage and explain the mysteries of

the Morse system. I replied that I thought he was in

the right place, and told him to get busy with his talk

on dots and dashes. Always modest, Edison was so

overcome he could hardly speak, but he managed

to say, finally, that as his friend Mr. Adams was

better equipped with cheek than he was, we would

change places, and he would do the demonstrating

while I explained the whole thing. This caused the

bevy to turn to see where the lecturer was. I went

on the stage, said something, and we did some

telegraphing over the line. I guess it was satisfactory;

we got the money, which was the main point to us."

Edison tells the story in a similar manner, but insists

that it was he who saved the situation. "I managed

to say that I would work the apparatus, and Mr.

Adams would make the explanations. Adams was so

embarrassed that he fell over an ottoman. The girls

tittered, and this increased his embarrassment until he

couldn't say a word. The situation was so desperate

that for a reason I never could explain I started in

myself and talked and explained better than I ever did

before or since. I can talk to two or three persons;

but when there are more they radiate some unknown

form of influence which paralyzes my vocal cords.

However, I got out of this scrape, and many times

afterward when I chanced with other operators to meet

some of the young ladies on their way home from

school, they would smile and nod, much to the

mystification of the operators, who were ignorant of

this episode."



Another amusing story of this period of impecuniosity

and financial strain is told thus by Edison: "My

friend Adams was working in the Franklin Telegraph

Company, which competed with the Western Union.

Adams was laid off, and as his financial resources had

reached absolute zero centigrade, I undertook to let

him sleep in my hall bedroom. I generally had hall

bedrooms, because they were cheap and I needed

money to buy apparatus. I also had the pleasure of

his genial company at the boarding-house about a

mile distant, but at the sacrifice of some apparatus.

One morning, as we were hastening to breakfast, we

came into Tremont Row, and saw a large crowd in

front of two small `gents' furnishing goods stores.

We stopped to ascertain the cause of the excitement.

One store put up a paper sign in the display window

which said: `Three-hundred pairs of stockings received

this day, five cents a pair--no connection with the

store next door.' Presently the other store put up

a sign stating they had received three hundred pairs,

price three cents per pair, and stated that they had

no connection with the store next door. Nobody

went in. The crowd kept increasing. Finally, when

the price had reached three pairs for one cent, Adams

said to me: `I can't stand this any longer; give me

a cent.' I gave him a nickel, and he elbowed his way

in; and throwing the money on the counter, the

store being filled with women clerks, he said: `Give

me three pairs.' The crowd was breathless, and the

girl took down a box and drew out three pairs of

baby socks. `Oh!' said Adams, `I want men's size.'

`Well, sir, we do not permit one to pick sizes for that

amount of money.' And the crowd roared; and this

broke up the sales."



It has generally been supposed that Edison did not

take up work on the stock ticker until after his arrival

a little later in New York; but he says: "After the

vote-recorder I invented a stock ticker, and started

a ticker service in Boston; had thirty or forty

subscribers, and operated from a room over the Gold

Exchange. This was about a year after Callahan

started in New York." To say the least, this evidenced

great ability and enterprise on the part of

the youth. The dealings in gold during the Civil

War and after its close had brought gold indicators

into use, and these had soon been followed by "stock

tickers," the first of which was introduced in New

York in 1867. The success of this new but still

primitively crude class of apparatus was immediate.

Four manufacturers were soon busy trying to keep

pace with the demands for it from brokers; and the

Gold & Stock Telegraph Company formed to exploit

the system soon increased its capital from $200,000

to $300,000, paying 12 per cent. dividends on the

latter amount. Within its first year the capital was

again increased to $1,000,000, and dividends of 10

per cent. were paid easily on that sum also. It is

needless to say that such facts became quickly known

among the operators, from whose ranks, of course,

the new employees were enlisted; and it was a common

ambition among the more ingenious to produce

a new ticker. From the beginning, each phase of

electrical development--indeed, each step in

mechanics--has been accompanied by the well-known

phenomenon of invention; namely, the attempt of the

many to perfect and refine and even re-invent where

one or two daring spirits have led the way. The

figures of capitalization and profit just mentioned

were relatively much larger in the sixties than they

are to-day; and to impressionable young operators

they spelled illimitable wealth. Edison was, how

ever, about the only one in Boston of whom history

makes record as achieving any tangible result in this

new art; and he soon longed for the larger telegraphic

opportunity of New York. His friend, Milt Adams,

went West with quenchless zest for that kind of roving

life and aimless adventure of which the serious

minded Edison had already had more than enough.

Realizing that to New York he must look for further

support in his efforts, Edison, deep in debt for his

embryonic inventions, but with high hope and

courage, now made the next momentous step in his

career. He was far riper in experience and practice

of his art than any other telegrapher of his age, and

had acquired, moreover, no little knowledge of the

practical business of life. Note has been made above

of his invention of a stock ticker in Boston, and of

his establishing a stock-quotation circuit. This was

by no means all, and as a fitting close to this chapter

he may be quoted as to some other work and its perils

in experimentation: "I also engaged in putting up

private lines, upon which I used an alphabetical dial

instrument for telegraphing between business

establishments, a forerunner of modern telephony. This

instrument was very simple and practical, and any

one could work it after a few minutes' explanation.

I had these instruments made at Mr. Hamblet's, who

had a little shop where he was engaged in experimenting

with electric clocks. Mr. Hamblet was the

father and introducer in after years of the Western

Union Telegraph system of time distribution. My

laboratory was the headquarters for the men, and

also of tools and supplies for those private lines.

They were put up cheaply, as I used the roofs of

houses, just as the Western Union did. It never

occurred to me to ask permission from the owners;

all we did was to go to the store, etc., say we were

telegraph men, and wanted to go up to the wires on

the roof; and permission was always granted.



"In this laboratory I had a large induction coil

which I had borrowed to make some experiments with.

One day I got hold of both electrodes of the coil, and

it clinched my hand on them so that I couldn't let

go. The battery was on a shelf. The only way I

could get free was to back off and pull the coil, so

that the battery wires would pull the cells off the shelf

and thus break the circuit. I shut my eyes and

pulled, but the nitric acid splashed all over my face

and ran down my back. I rushed to a sink, which

was only half big enough, and got in as well as I could

and wiggled around for several minutes to permit

the water to dilute the acid and stop the pain. My

face and back were streaked with yellow; the skin

was thoroughly oxidized. I did not go on the street

by daylight for two weeks, as the appearance of my

face was dreadful. The skin, however, peeled off,

and new skin replaced it without any damage."


