





The Economy of Machinery and Manufactures

by Charles Babbage

1832







Preface



    The present volume may be considered as one of the

consequences that have resulted from the calculating engine, the

construction of which I have been so long superintending. Having

been induced, during the last ten years, to visit a considerable

number of workshops and factories, both in England and on the

Continent, for the purpose of endeavouring to make myself

acquainted with the various resources of mechanical art, I was

insensibly led to apply to them those principles of

generalization to which my other pursuits had naturally given

rise. The increased number of curious processes and interesting

facts which thus came under my attention, as well as of the

reflections which they suggested, induced me to believe that the

publication of some of them might be of use to persons who

propose to bestow their attention on those enquiries which I have

only incidentally considered. With this view it was my intention

to have delivered the present work in the form of a course of

lectures at Cambridge; an intention which I was subsequently

induced to alter. The substance of a considerable portion of it

has, however, appeared among the preliminary chapters of the

mechanical part of the Encyclopedia Metropolitana.

    I have not attempted to offer a complete enumeration of all

the mechanical principles which regulate the application of

machinery to arts and manufactures, but I have endeavoured to

present to the reader those which struck me as the most

important, either for understanding the actions of machines, or

for enabling the memory to classify and arrange the facts

connected with their employment. Still less have I attempted to

examine all the difficult questions of political economy which

are intimately connected with such enquiries. It was impossible

not to trace or to imagine, among the wide variety of facts

presented to me, some principles which seemed to pervade many

establishments; and having formed such conjectures, the desire to

refute or to verify them, gave an additional interest to the

pursuit. Several of the principles which I have proposed, appear

to me to have been unnoticed before. This was particularly the

case with respect to the explanation I have given of the division

of labour; but further enquiry satisfied me that I had been

anticipated by M. Gioja, and it is probable that additional

research would enable me to trace most of the other principles,

which I had thought original, to previous writers, to whose merit

I may perhaps be unjust, from my want of acquaintance with the

historical branch of the subject.

    The truth however of the principles I have stated, is of much

more importance than their origin; and the utility of an enquiry

into them, and of establishing others more correct, if these

should be erroneous, can scarcely admit of a doubt.

    The difficulty of understanding the processes of manufactures

has unfortunately been greatly overrated. To examine them with

the eye of a manufacturer, so as to be able to direct others to

repeat them, does undoubtedly require much skill and previous

acquaintance with the subject; but merely to apprehend their

general principles and mutual relations, is within the power of

almost every person possessing a tolerable education.

    Those who possess rank in a manufacturing country, can

scarcely be excused if they are entirely ignorant of principles,

whose development has produced its greatness. The possessors of

wealth can scarcely be indifferent to processes which, nearly or

remotely have been the fertile source of their possessions. Those

who enjoy leisure can scarcely find a more interesting and

instructive pursuit than the examination of the workshops of

their own country, which contain within them a rich mine of

knowledge, too generally neglected by the wealthier classes.

    It has been my endeavour, as much as possible, to avoid all

technical terms, and to describe, in concise language, the arts I

have had occasion to discuss. In touching on the more abstract

principles of political economy, after shortly stating the

reasons on which they are founded, I have endeavoured to support

them by facts and anecdotes; so that whilst young persons might

be amused and instructed by the illustrations, those of more

advanced judgement may find subject for meditation in the general

conclusions to which they point. I was anxious to support the

principles which I have advocated by the observations of others,

and in this respect I found myself peculiarly fortunate. The

reports of committees of the House of Commons, upon various

branches of commerce and manufactures, and the evidence which

they have at different periods published on those subjects, teem

with information of the most important kind, rendered doubly

valuable by the circumstances under which it has been collected.

From these sources I have freely taken, and I have derived some

additional confidence from the support they have afforded to my

views. *



Charles Babbage

Dorset Street

Manchester Square

8 June, 1832





Preface to the Second Edition



    In two months from the publication of the first edition of

this volume, three thousand copies were in the hands of the

public. Very little was spent in advertisements; the booksellers,

instead of aiding, impeded its sale; * it formed no part of any

popular series and yet the public, in a few weeks, purchased the

whole edition. Some small part of this success, perhaps, was due

to the popular exposition of those curious processes which are

carried on in our workshops, and to the endeavour to take a short

view of the general principles which direct the manufactories of

the country. But the chief reason was the commanding attraction

of the subject, and the increasing desire to become acquainted

with the pursuits and interests of that portion of the people

which has recently acquired so large an accession of political

influence.

    A greater degree of attention than I had expected has been

excited by what I have stated in the first edition, respecting

the 'Book-trade'. Until I had commenced the chapter, 'On the

separate cost of each process of a manufacture', I had no

intention of alluding to that subject: but the reader will

perceive that I have throughout this volume, wherever I could,

employed as illustrations, objects of easy access to the reader;

and, in accordance with that principle, I selected the volume

itself. When I arrived at the chapter, 'On combinations of

masters against the public', I was induced, for the same reason,

to expose a combination connected with literature, which, in my

opinion, is both morally and politically wrong. I entered upon

this enquiry without the slightest feeling of hostility to that

trade, nor have I any wish unfavourable to it; but I think a

complete reform in its system would add to its usefulness and

respectability. As the subject of that chapter has been much

discussed, I have thought it right to take a view of the various

arguments which have been advanced, and to offer my own opinion

respecting their validity - and there I should have left the

subject, content to allow my general character to plead for me

against insinuations respecting my motives - but as the remarks

of some of my critics affect the character of another person, I

think it but just to state circumstances which will clearly

disprove them.

    Mr Fellowes, of Ludgate Street, who had previously been the

publisher of some other volumes for me, had undertaken the

publication of the first edition of the present work. A short

time previous to its completion, I thought it right to call his

attention to the chapter in which the book-trade is discussed;

with the view both of making him acquainted with what I had

stated, and also of availing myself of his knowledge in

correcting any accidental error as to the facts. Mr Fellowes,

'differing from me entirely respecting the conclusions I had

arrived at', then declined the publication of the volume. If I

had then chosen to apply to some of those other booksellers,

whose names appear in the Committee of 'The Trade', it is

probable that they also would have declined the office of

publishing for me; and, had my object been to make a case against

the trade, such a course would have assisted me. But I had no

such feeling; and having procured a complete copy of the whole

work, I called with it on Mr Knight, of Pall Mall East, whom

until that day I had never seen, and with whom I had never

previously had the slightest communication. I left the book in Mr

Knight's hands, with a request that, when he had read it, I might

be informed whether he would undertake the publication of it; and

this he consented to do. Mr Knight, therefore, is so far from

being responsible for a single opinion in the present volume,

that he saw it only, for a short time, a few days previous to its

publication.

    It has been objected to me, that I have exposed too freely

the secrets of trade. The only real secrets of trade are

industry, integrity, and knowledge: to the possessors of these no

exposure can be injurious; and they never fail to produce respect

and wealth.

    The alterations in the present edition are so frequent, that

I found it impossible to comprise them in a supplement. But the

three new chapters, 'On money as a medium of exchange'; 'On a new

system of manufacturing'; and 'On the effect of machinery in

reducing the demand for labour'; will shortly be printed

separately, for the use of the purchasers of the first edition.

    I am inclined to attach some importance to the new system of

manufacturing; and venture to throw it out with the hope of its

receiving a full discussion among those who are most interested

in the subject. I believe that some such system of conducting

manufactories would greatly increase the productive powers of any

country adopting it; and that our own possesses much greater

facilities for its application than other countries, in the

greater intelligence and superior education of the working

classes. The system would naturally commence in some large town,

by the union of some of the most prudent and active workmen; and

their example, if successful, would be followed by others. The

small capitalist would next join them, and such factories would

go on increasing until competition compelled the large capitalist

to adopt the same system; and, ultimately, the whole faculties of

every man engaged in manufacture would be concentrated upon one

object - the art of producing a good article at the lowest

possible cost - whilst the moral effect on that class of the

population would be useful in the highest degree, since it would

render character of far greater value to the workman than it is

at present.

    To one criticism which has been made, this volume is

perfectly open. I have dismissed the important subject of the

patent-laws in a few lines. The subject presents, in my opinion,

great difficulties, and I have been unwilling to write upon it,

because I do not see my way. I will only here advert to one

difficulty. What constitutes an invention? Few simple mechanical

contrivances are new; and most combinations may be viewed as

species, and classed under genera of more or less generality; and

may, in consequence, be pronounced old or new, according to the

mechanical knowledge of the person who gives his opinion.

    Some of my critics have amused their readers with the

wildness of the schemes I have occasionally thrown out; and I

myself have sometimes smiled along with them. Perhaps it were

wiser for present reputation to offer nothing but profoundly

meditated plans, but I do not think knowledge will be most

advanced by that course; such sparks may kindle the energies of

other minds more favourably circumstanced for pursuing the

enquiries. Thus I have now ventured to give some speculations on

the mode of blowing furnaces for smelting iron; and even

supposing them to be visionary, it is of some importance thus to

call the attention of a large population, engaged in one of our

most extensive manufactures, to the singular fact, that

four-fifths of the steam power used to blow their furnaces

actually cools them.

    I have collected, with some pains, the criticisms* on the

first edition of this work, and have availed myself of much

information which has been communicated to me by my friends, for

the improvement of the present volume. If I have succeeded in

expressing that I had to explain with perspicuity, I am aware

that much of this clearness is due to my friend, Dr Fitton, to

whom both the present and the former edition are indebted for

such an examination and correction, as an author himself has very

rarely the power to bestow.



22 November, 1832.





Introduction



    The object of the present volume is to point out the effects

and the advantages which arise from the use of tools and

machines; to endeavour to classify their modes of action; and to

trace both the causes and the consequences of applying machinery

to supersede the skill and power of the human arm.

    A view of the mechanical part of the subject will, in the

first instance, occupy our attention, and to this the first

section of the work will be devoted. The first chapter of the

section will contain some remarks on the general sources from

whence the advantages of machinery are. derived, and the

succeeding nine chapters will contain a detailed examination of

principles of a less general character. The eleventh chapter

contains numerous subdivisions, and is important from the

extensive classification it affords of the arts in which copying

is so largely employed. The twelfth chapter, which completes the

first section, contains a few suggestions for the assistance of

those who propose visiting manufactories.

    The second section, after an introductory chapter on the

difference between making and manufacturing, will contain, in the

succeeding chapters, a discussion of many of the questions which

relate to the political economy of the subject. It was found that

the domestic arrangement, or interior economy of factories, was

so interwoven with the more general questions, that it was deemed

unadvisable to separate the two subjects. The concluding chapter

of this section, and of the work itself, relates to the future

prospects of manufactures, as arising from the application of

science.



Chapter 1



Sources of the Advantages arising from Machinery and Manufactures



    1. There exists, perhaps, no single circumstance which

distinguishes our country more remarkably from all others, than

the vast extent and perfection to which we have carried the

contrivance of tools and machines for forming those conveniences

of which so large a quantity is consumed by almost every class of

the community. The amount of patient thought, of repeated

experiment, of happy exertion of genius, by which our

manufactures have been created and carried to their present

excellence, is scarcely to be imagined. If we look around the

rooms we inhabit, or through those storehouses of every

convenience, of every luxury that man can desire, which deck the

crowded streets of our larger cities, we shall find in the

history of each article, of every fabric, a series of failures

which have gradually led the way to excellence; and we shall

notice, in the art of making even the most insignificant of them,

processes calculated to excite our admiration by their

simplicity, or to rivet our attention by their unlooked-for

results.

    2. The accumulation of skill and science which has been

directed to diminish the difficulty of producing manufactured

goods, has not been beneficial to that country alone in which it

is concentrated; distant kingdoms have participated in its

advantages. The luxurious natives of the East,(1*) and the ruder

inhabitants of the African desert are alike indebted to our

looms. The produce of our factories has preceded even our most

enterprising travellers.(2*) The cotton of India is conveyed by

British ships round half our planet. to be woven by British skill

in the factories of Lancashire: it is again set in motion by

British capital; and, transported to the very plains whereon it

grew, is repurchased by the lords of the soil which gave it

birth, at a cheaper price than that at which their coarser

machinery enables them to manufacture it themselves.(3*)

    3. The large proportion of the population of this country,

who are engaged in manufactures, appears from the following table

deduced from a statement in an Essay on the Distribution of

Wealth, by the Rev. R. Jones:



 For every hundred persons employed in agriculture, there are:   

              Agriculturists Non-agriculturists



 In Bengal          100             25

 In Italy           100             31

 In France          100             50

 In England         100             200



    The fact that the proportion of non-agricultural to

agricultural persons is continually increasing, appears both from

the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons upon

Manufacturers' Employment, July, l830, and from the still later

evidence of the last census; from which document the annexed

table of the increase of population in our great manufacturing

towns, has been deduced.



 Increase of population per cent



 Names of places    180l-11   1811-21   l821-31   Total

 Manchester           22        40        47       151

 Glasgow              30        46        38       161

 Liverpool(4*)        26        31        44       138

 Nottingham           19        18        25        75

 Birmingham           16        24        33        90

 Great Britain        14.2      15.7      15.5      52.5



    Thus, in three periods of ten years, during each of which the

general population of the country has increased about 15 per

cent, or about 52 per cent upon the whole period of thirty years,

the population of these towns has, on the average, increased 132

per cent. After this statement, there requires no further

argument to demonstrate the vast importance to the well-being of

this country, of making the interests of its manufacturers well

understood and attended to.

    4. The advantages which are derived from machinery and

manufactures seem to arise principally from three sources: The

addition which they make to human power. The economy they produce

of human time. The conversion of substances apparently common and

worthless into valuable products.

    5. Of additions to human power. With respect to the first of

these causes, the forces derived from wind, from water, and from

steam, present themselves to the mind of every one; these are, in

fact, additions to human power, and will be considered in a

future page: there are, however, other sources of its increase,

by which the animal force of the individual is itself made to act

with far greater than its unassisted power; and to these we shall

at present confine our observations.

    The construction of palaces, of temples, and of tombs, seems

to have occupied the earliest attention of nations just entering

on the career of civilization; and the enormous blocks of stone

moved from their native repositories to minister to the grandeur

or piety of the builders, have remained to excite the

astonishment of their posterity, long after the purposes of many

of these records, as well as the names of their founders, have

been forgotten. The different degrees of force necessary to move

these ponderous masses, will have varied according to the

mechanical knowledge of the people employed in their transport;

and that the extent of power required for this purpose is widely

different under different circumstances, will appear from the

following experiment, which is related by M. Rondelet, Sur L'Art

de Batir. A block of squared stone was taken for the subject of

experiment:



                                lbs

 1. Weight of stone 1080

 2. In order to drag this stone along the floor of the quarry,

roughly chiselled, it required a force equal to 758

 3. The same stone dragged over a floor of planks required 652

 4. The same stone placed on a platform of wood, and dragged over

a floor of planks, required 606

 5. After soaping the two surfaces of wood which slid over each

other, it required 182

 6. The same stone was now placed upon rollers of three inches

diameter, when it required to put it in motion along the floor of

the quarry 34

 7. To drag it by these rollers over a wooden floor 28

 8. When the stone was mounted on a wooden platform, and the same

rollers placed between that and a plank floor, it required 22



    From this experiment it results, that the force necessary to

move a stone along



                                     Part of its weight



 The roughly chiselled floor of its quarry is nearly 2/3

 Along a wooden floor                                3/5

 By wood upon wood                                   5/9

 If the wooden surfaces are soaped                   1/6

 With rollers on the floor of the quarry             1/32

 On rollers on wood                                  1/40

 On rollers between wood                             1/50



    At each increase of knowledge, as well as on the contrivance

of every new tool, human labour becomes abridged. The man who

contrived rollers, invented a tool by which his power was

quintupled. The workman who first suggested the employment of

soap or grease, was immediately enabled to move, without exerting

a greater effort, more than three times the weight he could

before.(5*)

    6. The economy of human time is the next advantage of

machinery in manufactures. So extensive and important is this

effect, that we might, if we were inclined to generalize, embrace

almost all the advantages under this single head: but the

elucidation of principles of less extent will contribute more

readily to a knowledge of the subject; and, as numerous examples

will be presented to the reader in the ensuing pages, we shall

restrict our illustrations upon this point.

    As an example of the economy of time, the use of gunpowder in

blasting rocks may be noticed. Several pounds of powder may be

purchased for a sum acquired by a few days' labour: yet when this

is employed for the purpose alluded to, effects are frequently

produced which could not, even with the best tools, be

accomplished by other means in less than many months.

    The dimensions of one of the blocks of limestone extracted

from the quarries worked for the formation of the breakwater at

Plymouth. were 26 1/2 ft long, 13 ft wide, and 16 ft deep. This

mass, containing above 4,800 cubic feet, and weighing about 400

tons, was blasted three times. Two charges of 50 lbs each were

successively exploded in a hole 13 feet deep, the bore being 3

inches at top and 2 1/2 inches at bottom: 100 lbs of powder were

afterwards exploded in the rent formed by those operations. Each

pound of gunpowder separated from the rock two tons of matter, or

nearly 4,500 times its own weight. The expense of the powder was

*6, or nearly 7 1/2d. per lb: the boring occupied two men during

a day and a half, and cost about 9s.; and the value of the

produce was, at that time, about *45.

    7. The simple contrivance of tin tubes for speaking through,

communicating between different apartments, by which the

directions of the superintendent are instantly conveyed to the

remotest parts of an establishment, produces a considerable

economy of time. It is employed in the shops and manufactories in

London, and might with advantage be used in domestic

establishments, particularly in large houses, in conveying orders

from the nursery to the kitchen, or from the house to the stable.

Its convenience arises not merely from saving the servant or

workman useless journeys to receive directions, but from

relieving the master himself from that indisposition to give

trouble, which frequently induces him to forego a trifling want,

when he knows that his attendant must mount several flights of

stairs to ascertain his wishes, and, after descending, must mount

again to supply them. The distance to which such a mode of

communication can be extended, does not appear to have been

ascertained, and would be an interesting subject for enquiry.

Admitting it to be possible between London and Liverpool, about

seventeen minutes would elapse before the words spoken at one end

would reach the other extremity of the pipe.

    8. The art of using the diamond for cutting glass has

undergone, within a few years, a very important improvement. A

glazier's apprentice, when using a diamond set in a conical

ferrule, as was always the practice about twenty years since,

found great difficulty in acquiring the art of using it with

certainty; and, at the end of a seven years' apprenticeship, many

were found but indifferently skilled in its employment. This

arose from the difficulty of finding the precise angle at which

the diamond cuts, and of guiding it along the glass at the proper

inclination when that angle is found. Almost the whole of the

time consumed and of the glass destroyed in acquiring the art of

cutting glass, may now be saved by the use of an improved tool.

The gem is set in a small piece of squared brass with its edges

nearly parallel to one side of the square. A person skilled in

its use now files away the brass on one side until, by trial, he

finds that the diamond will make a clean cut, when guided by

keeping this edge pressed against a ruler. The diamond and its

mounting are now attached to a stick like a pencil, by means of a

swivel allowing a small angular motion. Thus, even the beginner

at once applies the cutting edge at the proper angle, by pressing

the side of the brass against a ruler; and even though the part

he holds in his hand should deviate a little from the required

angle, it communicates no irregularity to the position of the

diamond, which rarely fails to do its office when thus employed.

    The relative hardness of the diamond, in different

directions, is a singular fact. An experienced workman, on whose

judgement I can rely, informed me that he has seen a diamond

ground with diamond powder on a cast-iron mill for three hours

without its being at all worn, but that, on changing its

direction with respect to the grinding surface, the same edge was

ground away.

    9. Employment of materials of little value. The skins used by

the goldbeater are produced from the offal of animals. The hoofs

of horses and cattle, and other horny refuse, are employed in the

production of the prussiate of potash, that beautiful, yellow,

crystallized salt, which is exhibited in the shops of some of our

chemists. The worn-out saucepans and tinware of our kitchens,

when beyond the reach of the tinker's art, are not utterly

worthless. We sometimes meet carts loaded with old tin kettles

and worn-out iron coal-skuttles traversing our streets. These

have not yet completed their useful course; the less corroded

parts are cut into strips, punched with small holes, and

varnished with a coarse black varnish for the use of the

trunk-maker, who protects the edges and angles of his boxes with

them; the remainder are conveyed to the manufacturing chemists in

the outskirts of the town, who employ them in combination with

pyroligneous acid, in making a black die for the use of calico

printers.

    10. Of tools. The difference between a tool and a machine is

not capable of very precise distinction; nor is it necessary, in

a popular explanation of those terms, to limit very strictly

their acceptation. A tool is usually more simple than a machine;

it is generally used with the hand, whilst a machine is

frequently moved by animal or steam power. The simpler machines


are often merely one or more tools placed in a frame, and acted

on by a moving power. In pointing out the advantages of tools, we

shall commence with some of the simplest.

    11. To arrange twenty thousand needles thrown promiscuously

into a box, mixed and entangled in every possible direction, in

such a form that they shall be all parallel to each other, would,

at first sight, appear a most tedious occupation; in fact, if

each needle were to be separated individually, many hours must be

consumed in the process. Yet this is an operation which must be

performed many times in the manufacture of needles; and it is

accomplished in a few minutes by a very simple tool; nothing more

being requisite than a small flat tray of sheet iron, slightly

concave at the bottom. In this the needles are placed, and shaken

in a peculiar manner, by throwing them up a very little, and

giving at the same time a slight longitudinal motion to the tray.

The shape of the needles assists their arrangement; for if two

needles cross each other (unless, which is exceedingly

improbable, they happen to be precisely balanced), they will,

when they fall on the bottom of the tray, tend to place

themselves side by side, and the hollow form of the tray assists

this disposition. As they have no projection in any part to

impede this tendency, or to entangle each other, they are, by

continually shaking, arranged lengthwise, in three or four

minutes. The direction of the shake is now changed, the needles

are but little thrown up, but the tray is shaken endways; the

result of which is, that in a minute or two the needles which

were previously arranged endways become heaped up in a wall, with

their ends against the extremity of the tray. They are then

removed, by hundreds at a time, with a broad iron spatula, on

which they are retained by the forefinger of the left hand. As

this parallel arrangement of the needles must be repeated many

times, if a cheap and expeditious method had not been devised,

the expense of the manufacture would have been considerably

enhanced.

    12. Another process in the art of making needles furnishes an

example of one of the simplest contrivances which can come under

the denomination of a tool. After the needles have been arranged

in the manner just described, it is necessary to separate them

into two parcels, in order that their points may be all in one

direction. This is usually done by women and children. The

needles are placed sideways in a heap, on a table, in front of

each operator, just as they are arranged by the process above

described. From five to ten are rolled towards this person with

the forefinger of the left hand; this separates them a very small

space from each other, and each in its turn is pushed lengthwise

to the right or to the left, according to the direction of the

point. This is the usual process, and in it every needle passes

individually under the finger of the operator. A small alteration

expedites the process considerably: the child puts on the

forefinger of its right hand a small cloth cap or fingerstall,

and rolling out of the heap from six to twelve needles, he keeps

them down by the forefinger of the left hand, whilst he presses

the forefinger of the right hand gently against their ends: those

which have the points towards the right hand stick into the

fingerstall; and the child, removing the finger of the left hand,

slightly raises the needles sticking into the cloth, and then

pushes them towards the left side. Those needles which had their

eyes on the right hand do not stick into the finger cover, and

are pushed to the heap on the right side before the repetition of

this process. By means of this simple contrivance each movement

of the finger, from one side to the other, carries five or six

needles to their proper heap; whereas, in the former method,

frequently only one was moved, and rarely more than two or three

were transported at one movement to their place.

    13. Various operations occur in the arts in which the

assistance of an additional hand would be a great convenience to

the workman, and in these cases tools or machines of the simplest

structure come to our aid: vices of different forms, in which the

material to be wrought is firmly grasped by screws, are of this

kind, and are used in almost every workshop; but a more striking

example may be found in the trade of the nail-maker.

    Some kinds of nails, such as those used for defending the

soles of coarse shoes, called hobnails, require a particular form

of the head, which is made by the stroke of a die. The workman

holds one end of the rod of iron out of which he forms the nails

in his left hand; with his right hand he hammers the red-hot end

of it into a point, and cutting the proper length almost off,

bends it nearly at a right angle. He puts this into a hole in a

small stake-iron immediately under a hammer which is connected

with a treadle, and has a die sunk in its surface corresponding

to the intended form of the head; and having given one part of

the form to the head with the small hammer in his hand, he moves

the treadle with his foot, disengages the other hammer, and

completes the figure of the head; the returning stroke produced

by the movement of the treadle striking the finished nail out of

the hole in which it was retained. Without this substitution of

his foot for another hand, the workman would, probably, be

obliged to heat the nails twice over.

    14. Another, though fortunately a less general substitution

of tools for human hands, is used to assist the labour of those

who are deprived by nature, or by accident, of some of their

limbs. Those who have had an opportunity of examining the

beautiful contrivances for the manufacture of shoes by machinery,

which we owe to the fertile invention of Mr Brunel, must have

noticed many instances in which the workmen were enabled to

execute their task with precision, although labouring under the

disadvantages of the loss of an arm or leg. A similar instance

occurs at Liverpool, in the Institution for the Blind, where a

machine is used by those afflicted with blindness, for weaving

sash-lines; it is said to have been the invention of a person

suffering under that calamity. Other examples might be mentioned

of contrivances for the use, the amusement, or the instruction of

the wealthier classes, who labour under the same natural

disadvantages. These triumphs of skill and ingenuity deserve a

double portion of our admiration when applied to mitigate the

severity of natural or accidental misfortune; when they supply

the rich with occupation and knowledge; when they relieve the

poor from the additional evils of poverty and want.

    15. Division of the objects of machinery. There exists a

natural, although, in point of number, a very unequal division

amongst machines: they may be classed as; first, those which are

employed to produce power. and as, secondly, those which are

intended merely to transmit force and execute work. The first of

these divisions is of great importance, and is very limited in

the variety of its species, although some of those species

consist of numerous individuals.

    Of that class of mechanical agents by which motion is

transmitted - the lever, the pulley, the wedge, and many others -

it has been demonstrated, that no power is gained by their use,

however combined. Whatever force is applied at one point can only

be exerted at some other, diminished by friction and other

incidental causes; and it has been further proved, that whatever

is gained in the rapidity of execution is compensated by the

necessity of exerting additional force. These two principles,

long since placed beyond the reach of doubt, cannot be too

constantly borne in mind. But in limiting our attempts to things

which are possible, we are still, as we hope to show, possessed

of a field of inexhaustible research, and of advantages derived

from mechanical skill, which have but just begun to exercise

their influence on our arts, and may be pursued without limit

contributing to the improvement, the wealth, and the happiness of

our race.

    16. Of those machines by which we produce power, it may be

observed, that although they are to us immense acquisitions, yet

in regard to two of the sources of this power - the force of wind

and of water - we merely make use of bodies in a state of motion

by nature; we change the directions of their movement in order to

render them subservient to our purposes, but we neither add to

nor diminish the quantity of motion in existence. When we expose

the sails of a windmill obliquely to the gale, we check the

velocity of a small portion of the atmosphere, and convert its

own rectilinear motion into one of rotation in the sails; we thus

change the direction of force, but we create no power. The same

may be observed with regard to the sails of a vessel; the

quantity of motion given by them is precisely the same as that

which is destroyed in the atmosphere. If we avail ourselves of a

descending stream to turn a water-wheel, we are appropriating a

power which nature may appear, at first sight, to be uselessly

and irrecoverably wasting, but which, upon due examination, we

shall find she is ever regaining by other processes. The fluid

which is falling from a higher to a lower level, carries with it

the velocity due to its revolution with the earth at a greater

distance from its centre. It will therefore accelerate, although

to an almost infinitesimal extent, the earth's daily rotation.

The sum of all these increments of velocity, arising from the

descent of all the falling waters on the earth's surface, would

in time become perceptible, did not nature, by the process of

evaporation, convey the waters back to their sources; and thus

again, by removing matter to a greater distance from the centre,

destroy the velocity generated by its previous approach.

    17. The force of vapour is another fertile source of moving

power; but even in this case it cannot be maintained that power

is created. Water is converted into elastic vapour by the

combustion of fuel. The chemical changes which thus take place

are constantly increasing the atmosphere by large quantities of

carbonic acid and other gases noxious to animal life. The means

by which nature decomposes these elements, or reconverts them

into a solid form, are not sufficiently known: but if the end

could be accomplished by mechanical force, it is almost certain

that the power necessary to produce it would at least equal that

which was generated by the original combustion. Man, therefore,

does not create power; but, availing himself of his knowledge of

nature's mysteries, he applies his talents to diverting a small

and limited portion of her energies to his own wants: and,

whether he employs the regulated action of steam, or the more

rapid and tremendous effects of gunpowder, he is only producing

on a small scale compositions and decompositions which nature is

incessantly at work in reversing, for the restoration of that

equilibrium which we cannot doubt is constantly maintained

throughout even the remotest limits of our system. The operations

of man participate in the character of their author; they are

diminutive, but energetic during the short period of their

existence: whilst those of nature, acting over vast spaces, and

unlimited by time, are ever pursuing their silent and resistless

career.

    18. In stating the broad principle, that all combinations of

mechanical art can only augment the force communicated to the

machine at the expense of the time employed in producing the

effect, it might, perhaps, be imagined, that the assistance

derived from such contrivances is small. This is, however, by no

means the case: since the almost unlimited variety they afford,

enables us to exert to the greatest advantage whatever force we

employ. There is, it is true, a limit beyond which it is

impossible to reduce the power necessary to produce any given

effect, but it very seldom happens that the methods first

employed at all approach that limit. In dividing the knotted root

of a tree for fuel, how very different will be the time consumed,

according to the nature of the tool made use of! The hatchet, or

the adze, will divide it into small parts, but will consume a

large portion of the workman's time. The saw will answer the same

purpose more quickly and more effectually. This, in its turn, is

superseded by the wedge, which rends it in a still shorter time.

If the circumstances are favourable, and the workman skilful, the

time and expense may be still further reduced by the use of a

small quantity of gunpowder exploded in holes judiciously placed

in the block.

    19. When a mass of matter is to be removed a certain force

must be expended; and upon the proper economy of this force the

price of transport will depend. A country must, however, have

reached a high degree of civilization before it will have

approached the limit of this economy. The cotton of Java is

conveyed in junks to the coast of China; but from the seed not

being previously separated, three-quarters of the weight thus

carried is not cotton. This might, perhaps, be justified in Java

by the want of machinery to separate the seed, or by the relative

cost of the operation in the two countries. But the cotton

itself, as packed by the Chinese, occupies three times the bulk

of an equal quantity shipped by Europeans for their own markets.

Thus the freight of a given quantity of cotton costs the Chinese

nearly twelve times the price to which, by a proper attention to

mechanical methods, it might be reduced. *



NOTES:



1. 'The Bandana handkerchiefs manufactured at Glasgow have long

superseded the genuine ones, and are now committed in large

quantities both by the natives and Chines.' Crawford's Indian

Archipelago, vol. iii, p. 505.



2. 'Captain Clapperton, when on a visit at the court of the

Sultan Bello, states, that provisionswere regularly sent me from

the sultan's table on pewter dishes with the London stamp; and I

even had a piece of meat served up on a white wash-hand basin of

English manufacture.' Clapperton's Journey, p. 88.



3. At Calicut, in the East Indies (whence the cotton cloth caled

calico derivesits name), the price of labour is one-seventh of

that in England, yet the market is supplied from British looms.



4. Liverpool, though not itself a manufacturing town, has been

placed in this list, from its connection with Manchester, of

which it is the port.



5. So sensible are the effects of grease in diminishing friction,

that the drivers of sledges in Amsterdam, on which heavy goodsare

transported, cary in their hand a rope soaked in tallow, which

they thrown down from time to time before the sledge, in order

that, by passing over the rope, it may become greased.





Chapter 2



Accumulating Power



    20. Whenever the work to be done requires more force for its

execution than can be generated in the time necessary for its

completion, recourse must be had to some mechanical method of

preserving and condensing a part of the power exerted previously

to the commencement of the process. This is most frequently

accomplished by a fly-wheel, which is in fact nothing more than a

wheel having a very heavy rim, so that the greater part of its

weight is near the circumference. It requires great power applied

for some time to put this into rapid motion; but when moving with

considerable velocity, the effects are exceedingly powerful, if

its force be concentrated upon a small object. In some of the

iron works where the power of the steam-engine is a little too

small for the rollers which it drives, it is usual to set the

engine at work a short time before the red-hot iron is ready to

be removed from the furnace to the rollers, and to allow it to

work with great rapidity until the fly has acquired a velocity

rather alarming to those unused to such establishments. On

passing the softened mass of iron through the first groove, the

engine receives a great and very perceptible check; and its speed

is diminished at the next and at each succeeding passage, until

the iron bar is reduced to such a size that the ordinary power of

the engine is sufficient to roll it.

    21. The powerful effect of a large flywheel when its force

can be concentrated on a point, was curiously illustrated at one

of the largest of our manufactories. The proprietor was showing

to a friend the method of punching holes in iron plates for the

boilers of steam-engines. He held in his hand a piece of

sheet-iron three-eighths of an inch thick, which he placed under

the punch. Observing, after several holes had been made, that the

punch made its perforations more and more slowly, he called to

the engine-man to know what made the engine work so sluggishly,

when it was found that the flywheel and punching apparatus had

been detached from the steam-engine just at the commencement of

his experiment.

    22. Another mode of accumulating power arises from lifting a

weight and then allowing it to fall. A man, even with a heavy

hammer, might strike repeated blows upon the head of a pile

without producing any effect. But if he raises a much heavier

hammer to a much greater height, its fall, though far less

frequently repeated, will produce the desired effect.

    When a small blow is given to a large mass of matter, as to a

pile, the imperfect elasticity of the material causes a small

loss of momentum in the transmission of the motion from each

particle to the succeeding one; and, therefore, it may happen

that the whole force communicated shall be destroyed before it

reaches the opposite extremity.

    23. The power accumulated within a small space by gunpowder

is well known; and, though not strictly an illustration of the

subject discussed in this chapter, some of its effects, under

peculiar circumstances, are so singular, that an attempt to

explain them may perhaps be excused. If a gun is loaded with ball

it will not kick so much as when loaded with small shot; and

amongst different kinds of shot, that which is the smallest,

causes the greatest recoil against the shoulder. A gun loaded

with a quantity of sand, equal in weight to a charge of

snipe-shot, kicks still more. If, in loading, a space is left

between the wadding and the charge, the gun either recoils

violently, or bursts. If the muzzle of a gun has accidentally

been stuck into the ground, so as to be stopped up with clay, or

even with snow, or if it be fired with its muzzle plunged into

water, the almost certain result is that it bursts.

    The ultimate cause of these apparently inconsistent effects

is, that every force requires time to produce its effect; and if

the time requisite for the elastic vapour within to force out the

sides of the barrel, is less than that in which the condensation

of the air near the wadding is conveyed in sufficient force to

drive the impediment from the muzzle, then the barrel must burst.

If sometimes happens that these two forces are so nearly balanced

that the barrel only swells; the obstacle giving way before the

gun is actually burst.

    The correctness of this explanation will appear by tracing

step by step the circumstances which arise on discharging a gun

loaded with powder confined by a cylindrical piece of wadding,

and having its muzzle filled with clay, or some other substance

having a moderate degree of resistance. In this case the first

effect of the explosion is to produce an enormous pressure on

everything confining it, and to advance the wadding through a

very small space. Here let us consider it as at rest for a

moment, and examine its condition. The portion of air in

immediate contact with the wadding is condensed; and if the

wadding were to remain at rest, the air throughout the tube would

soon acquire a uniform density. But this would require a small

interval of time; for the condensation next the wadding would

travel with the velocity of sound to the other end, from whence,

being reflected back, a series of waves would be generated,

which, aided by the friction of the tube, would ultimately

destroy the motion.

    But until the first wave reaches the impediment at the

muzzle, the air can exert no pressure against it. Now if the

velocity communicated to the wadding is very much greater than

that of sound, the condensation of the air immediately in advance

of it may be very great before the resistance transmitted to the

muzzle is at all considerable; in which case the mutual repulsion

of the particles of air so compressed, will offer an absolute

barrier to the advance of the wadding.(1*)

    If this explanation be correct, the additional recoil, when a

gun is loaded with small shot or sand, may arise in some measure

from the condensation of the air contained between their

particles; but chiefly from the velocity communicated by the

explosion to those particles of the substances in immediate

contact with the powder being greater than that with which a wave

can be transmitted through them. It also affords a reason for the

success of a method of blasting rocks by filling the upper part

of the hole above the powder with sand, instead of clay rammed

hard. That the destruction of the gun barrel does not arise from

the property possessed by fluids, and in some measure also by

sand and small shot, of pressing equally in all directions, and

thus exerting a force against a large portion of the interior

surface, seems to be proved by a circumstance mentioned by Le

Vaillant and other travellers, that, for the purpose of taking

birds without injuring their plumage, they filled the barrel of

their fowling pieces with water, instead of loading them with a

charge of shot.

    24. The same reasoning explains a curious phenomenon which

occurs in firing a still more powerfully explosive substance. If

we put a small quantity of fulminating silver upon the face of an

anvil, and strike it slightly with a hammer, it explodes; but

instead of breaking either the hammer or the anvil, it is found

that that part of the face of each in contact with the

fulminating silver is damaged. In this case the velocity

communicated by the elastic matter disengaged may be greater than

the velocity of a wave traversing steel; so that the particles at

the surface are driven by the explosion so near to those next

adjacent, that when the compelling force is removed, the

repulsion of the particles within the mass drives back those

nearer to the surface, with such force, that they pass beyond the

limits of attraction, and are separated in the shape of powder.

    25. i The success of the experiment of firing a tallow candle

through a deal board, would be explained in the same manner, by

supposing the velocity of a wave propagated through deal to be

greater than that of a wave passing through tallow.

    25. ii The boiler of a steam-engine sometimes bursts even

during the escape of steam through the safety-valve. If the water

in the boiler is thrown upon any part which happens to be red

hot, the steam formed in the immediate neighbourhood of that part

expands with greater velocity than that with which a wave can be

transmitted through the less heated steam; consequently one

particle is urged against the next, and an almost invincible

obstacle is formed, in the same manner as described in the case

of the discharge of a gun. If the safety-valve is closed, it may

retain the pressure thus created for a short time, and even when

it is open the escape may not be sufficiently rapid to remove all

impediment; there may therefore exist momentarily within the

boiler pressures of various force, varying from that which can

just lift the safety-valve up to that which is sufficient, if

exerted during an extremely small space of time, to tear open the

boiler itself.

    26. This reasoning ought, however, to be admitted with

caution; and perhaps some inducement to examine it carefully may

be presented by tracing it to extreme cases. It would seem, but

this is not a necessary consequence, that a gun might be made so

long, that it would burst although no obstacle filled up its

muzzle. It should also follow that if, after the gun is charged,

the air were extracted from the barrel, though the muzzle be then

left closed, the gun ought not to burst. It would also seem to

follow from the principle of the explanation, that a body might

be projected in air, or other elastic resisting medium, with such

force that, after advancing a very short space it should return

in the same direction in which it was projected.



NOTES:



1. See Poisson's remarks, Ecole Polytec. Cahier, xxi, p. 191.



Chapter 3



Regulating Power



    27. Uniformity and steadiness in the rate at which machinery

works, are essential both for its effect and its duration. The

first illustration which presents itself is that beautiful

contrivance, the governor of the steam-engine. which must

immediately occur to all who are familiar with that admirable

engine. Wherever the increased speed of the engine would lead to

injurious or dangerous consequences, this is applied; and it is

equally the regulator of the water-wheel which drives a

spinning-jenny, or of the windmills which drain our fens. In the

dockyard at Chatham, the descending motion of a large platform,

on which timber is raised, is regulated by a governor; but as the

weight is very considerable, the velocity of this governor is

still further checked by causing its motion to take place in

water.

    28. Another very beautiful contrivance for regulating the

number of strokes made by a steam-engine, is used in Cornwall: it

is called the cataract, and depends on the time required to fill

a vessel plunged in water, the opening of the valve through which

the fluid is admitted being adjustable at the will of the

engine-man.

    29. The regularity of the supply of fuel to the fire under

the boilers of steam-engines is another mode of contributing to

the uniformity of their rate, and also economizes the consumption

of coal. Several patents have been taken out for methods of

regulating this supply: the general principle being to make the

engine supply the fire with small quantities of fuel at regular

intervals by means of a hopper, and to make it diminish this

supply when the engine works too quickly. One of the incidental

advantages of this plan is, that by throwing on a very small

quantity of coal at a time, the smoke is almost entirely

consumed. The dampers of ashpits and chimneys are also, in some

cases, connected with machines in order to regulate their speed.

    30. Another contrivance for regulating the effect of

machinery consists in a vane or fly, of little weight, but

presenting a large surface. This revolves rapidly, and soon

acquires a uniform rate, which it cannot greatly exceed, because

any addition to its velocity produces a much greater addition to

the resistance it meets with from the air. The interval between

the strokes on the bell of a clock is regulated in this way, and

the fly is so contrived, that the interval may be altered by

presenting the arms of it more or less obliquely to the direction

in which they move. This kind of fly, or vane, is generally used

in the smaller kinds of mechanism, and, unlike the heavy fly, it

is a destroyer instead of a preserver of force. It is the

regulator used in musical boxes, and in almost all mechanical

toys.

    31. The action of a fly, or vane, suggests the principle of

an instrument for measuring the altitude of mountains, which

perhaps deserves a trial, since, if it succeed only tolerably, it

will form a much more portable instrument than the barometer. It

is well known that the barometer indicates the weight of a column

of the atmosphere above it, whose base is equal to the bore of

the tube. It is also known that the density of the air adjacent

to the instrument will depend both on the weight of air above it,

and on the heat of the air at that place. If, therefore, we can

measure the density of the air, and its temperature, the height

of a column of mercury which it would support in the barometer

can be found by calculation. Now the thermometer gives

information respecting the temperature of the air immediately;

and its density might be ascertained by means of a watch and a

small instrument, in which the number of turns made by a vane

moved by a constant force, should be registered. The less dense

the air in which the vane revolves, the greater will be the

number of its revolutions in a given time: and tables could be

formed from experiments in partially exhausted vessels, aided by

calculation, from which, if the temperature of the air, and the

number of revolutions of the vane are given, the corresponding

height of the barometer might be found.(1*)



NOTES:



1. To persons who may be inclined to experiment upon this or any

other instrument, I would beg to suggest the perusal of the

section 'On the art of Observing', Observations on the Decline of

Science in England, p. 170, Fellowes, 1828.



Chapter 4



Increase and Diminution of Velocity



    32. The fatigue produced on the muscles of the human frame

does not altogether depend on the actual force employed in each

effort, but partly on the frequency with which it is exerted. The

exertion necessary to accomplish every operation consists of two

parts: one of these is the expenditure of force which is

necessary to drive the tool or instrument; and the other is the

effort required for the motion of some limb of the animal

producing the action. In driving a nail into a piece of wood, one

of these is lifting the hammer, and propelling its head against

the nail; the other is, raising the arm itself, and moving it in

order to use the hammer. If the weight of the hammer is

considerable, the former part will cause the greatest portion of

the exertion. If the hammer is light, the exertion of raising the

arm will produce the greatest part of the fatigue. It does

therefore happen, that operations requiring very trifling force,

if frequently repeated, will tire more effectually than more

laborious work. There is also a degree of rapidity beyond which

the action of the muscles cannot be pressed.

    33. The most advantageous load for a porter who carries wood

up stairs on his shoulders, has been investigated by M. Coulomb;

but he found from experiment that a man walking up stairs without

any load, and raising his burden by means of his own weight in

descending, could do as much work in one day, as four men

employed in the ordinary way with the most favourable load.

    34. The proportion between the velocity with which men or

animals move, and the weights they carry, is a matter of

considerable importance, particularly in military affairs. It is

also of great importance for the economy of labour, to adjust the

weight of that part of the animal's body which is moved, the

weight of the tool it urges, and the frequency of repetition of

these efforts, so as to produce the greatest effect. An instance

of the saving of time by making the same motion of the arm

execute two operations instead of one, occurs in the simple art

of making the tags of bootlaces: these tags are formed out of

very thin, tinned, sheet-iron, and were formerly cut out of long

strips of that material into pieces of such a breadth that when

bent round they just enclosed the lace. Two pieces of steel have

recently been fixed to the side of the shears, by which each

piece of tinned-iron as soon as it is cut is bent into a

semi-cylindrical form. The additional power required for this

operation is almost imperceptible. and it is executed by the same

motion of the arm which produces the cut. The work is usually

performed by women and children; and with the improved tool more

than three times the quantity of tags is produced in a given

time.(1*)

    35. Whenever the work is itself light, it becomes necessary,

in order to economize time, to increase the velocity. Twisting

the fibres of wool by the fingers would be a most tedious

operation: in the common spinning-wheel the velocity of the foot

is moderate, but by a very simple contrivance that of the thread

is most rapid. A piece of catgut passing round a large wheel, and

then round a small spindle, effects this change. This contrivance

is common to a multitude of machines, some of them very simple.

In large shops for the retail of ribands, it is necessary at

short intervals to 'take stock', that is, to measure and rewind

every piece of riband, an operation which, even with this mode of

shortening it, is sufficiently tiresome, but without it would be

almost impossible from its expense. The small balls of sewing

cotton, so cheap and so beautifully wound, are formed by a

machine on the same principle, and but a few steps more

complicated.

    36. In turning from the smaller instruments in frequent use

to the larger and more important machines, the economy arising

from the increase of velocity becomes more striking. In

converting cast into wrought-iron, a mass of metal, of about a

hundredweight, is heated almost to white heat, and placed under a

heavy hammer moved by water or steam power. This is raised by a

projection on a revolving axis; and if the hammer derived its

momentum only from the space through which it fell, it would

require a considerably greater time to give a blow. But as it is

important that the softened mass of red-hot iron should receive

as many blows as possible before it cools, the form of the cam or

projection on the axis is such, that the hammer, instead of being

lifted to a small height, is thrown up with a jerk, and almost

the instant after it strikes against a large beam, which acts as

a powerful spring, and drives it down on the iron with such

velocity that by these means about double the number of strokes

can be made in a given time. In the smaller tilt-hammers, this is

carried still further.. by striking the tail of the tilt-hammer

forcibly against a small steel anvil, it rebounds with such

velocity, that from three to five hundred strokes are made in a

minute. In the manufacture of anchors, an art in which a similar

contrivance is of still greater importance, it has only been

recently applied.

    37. In the manufacture of scythes, the length of the blade

renders it necessary that the workman should move readily, so as

to bring every part of it on the anvil in quick succession. This

is effected by placing him in a seat suspended by ropes from the

ceiling: so that he is enabled, with little bodily exertion, to

vary his distance, by pressing his feet against the block which

supports the anvil, or against the floor.

    38. An increase of velocity is sometimes necessary to render

operations possible: thus a person may skate with great rapidity

over ice which would not support his weight if he moved over it

more slowly. This arises from the fact, that time is requisite

for producing the fracture of the ice: as soon as the weight of

the skater begins to act on any point, the ice, supported by the

water, bends slowly under him; but if the skater's velocity is

considerable, he has passed off from the spot which was loaded

before the bending has reached the point which would cause the

ice to break.

    39. An effect not very different from this might take place

if very great velocity were communicated to boats. Let us suppose

a flatbottomed boat, whose bow forms an inclined plane with the

bottom, at rest in still water. If we imagine some very great

force suddenly to propel this boat, the inclination of the plane

at the forepart would cause it to rise in the water; and if the

force were excessive, it might even rise out of the water, and

advance, by a series of leaps, like a piece of slate or an oyster

shell, thrown as a 'duck and drake'.

    If the force were not sufficient to pull the boat out of the

water, but were just enough to bring its bottom to the surface,

it would be carried along with a kind of gliding motion with

great rapidity; for at every point of its course it would require

a certain time before. it could sink to its usual draft of water;

but before that time had elapsed, it would have advanced to

another point, and consequently have been raised by the reaction

of the water on the inclined plane at its forepart.

    40. The same fact, that bodies moving with great velocity

have not time to exert the full effect of their weight, seems to

explain a circumstance which appears to be very unaccountable. It

sometimes happens that when foot-passengers are knocked down by

carriages, the wheels pass over them with scarcely any injury,

though, if the weight of the carriage had rested on their body,

even for a few seconds, it would have crushed them to death. If

the view above taken is correct, the injury in such circumstances

will chiefly happen to that part of the body which is struck by

the advancing wheel.

    41. An operation in which rapidity is of essential importance

is in bringing the produce of mines up to the surface. The shafts

through which the produce is raised are sunk at a very great

expense, and it is, of course, desirable to sink as few of them

as possible. The matter to be extracted is therefore raised by

steam-engines with considerable, and without this many of our

mines could not be worked velocity, with profit.

    42. The effect of great velocity in modifying the form of a

cohesive substance is beautifully shown in the process for making

window glass, termed flashing', which is one of the most striking

operations in our domestic arts. A workman having dipped his iron

tube into the glass pot, and loaded it with several pounds of the

melted 'metal', blows out a large globe, which is connected with

his rod by a short thick hollow neck. Another workman now fixes

to the globe immediately opposite to its neck, an iron rod, the

extremity of which has been dipped in the melted glass; and when

this is firmly attached, a few drops of water separate the neck

of the globe from the iron tube. The rod with the globe attached

to it is now held at the mouth of a glowing furnace: and by

turning the rod the globe is made to revolve slowly, so as to be

uniformly exposed to the heat: the first effect of this softening

is to make the glass contract upon itself and to enlarge the

opening of the neck. As the softening proceeds, the globe is

turned more quickly on its axis, and when very soft and almost

incandescent, it is removed from the fire, and the velocity of

rotation being still continually increased, the opening enlarges

from the effect of the centrifugal force, at first gradually,

until at last the mouth suddenly expands or flashes' out into one

large circular sheet of red hot glass. The neck of the original

globe, which is to become the outer part of the sheet, is left

thick to admit of this expansion, and forms the edge of the

circular plate of glass, which is called a 'Table'. The centre

presents the appearance of a thick boss or prominence, called the

'Bull's-eye', at the part by which it was attached to the iron

rod.

    43. The most frequent reason for employing contrivances for

diminishing velocity, arises from the necessity of overcoming

great resistances with small power. Systems of pulleys, the

crane, and many other illustrations, might also be adduced here

as examples; but they belong more appropriately to some of the

other causes which we have assigned for the advantages of

machinery. The common smoke-jack is an instrument in which the

velocity communicated is too great for the purpose required, and

it is transmitted through wheels which reduce it to a more

moderate rate.

    44. Telegraphs are machines for conveying information over

extensive lines with great rapidity. They have generally been

established for the purposes of transmitting information during

war, but the increasing wants of man will probably soon render

them subservient to more peaceful objects.

    A few years since the telegraph conveyed to Paris information

of the discovery of a comet, by M. Gambart, at Marseilles: the

message arrived during a sitting of the French Board of

Longitude, and was sent in a note from the Minister of the

Interior to Laplace, the President, who received it whilst the

writer of these lines was sitting by his side. The object in this

instance was, to give the earliest publicity to the fact, and to

assure to M. Gambart the title of its first discoverer.

    At Liverpool a system of signals is established for the

purposes of commerce, so that each merchant can communicate with

his own vessel long before she arrives in the port.



NOTES:



1. See Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1826.



Chapter 5



Extending the Time of Action of Forces



    45. This is one of the most common and most useful of the

employments of machinery. The half minute which we daily devote

to the winding-up of our watches is an exertion of labour almost

insensible; yet, by the aid of a few wheels, its effect is spread

over the whole twenty-four hours. In our clocks, this extension

of the time of action of the original force impressed is carried

still further; the better kind usually require winding up once in

eight days, and some are occasionally made to continue in action

during a month, or even a year. Another familiar illustration may

be noticed in our domestic furniture: the common jack by which

our meat is roasted, is a contrivance to enable the cook in a few

minutes to exert a force which the machine retails out during the

succeeding hour in turning the loaded spit; thus enabling her to

bestow her undivided attention on the other important duties of

her vocation. A great number of automatons and mechanical toys

moved by springs, may be classed under this division.

    46. A small moving power, in the shape of a jack or a spring

with a train of wheels, is often of great convenience to the

experimental philosopher, and has been used with advantage in

magnetic and electric experiments where the rotation of a disk of

metal or other body is necessary, thus allowing to the enquirer

the unimpeded use of both his hands. A vane connected by a train

of wheels, and set in motion by a heavy weight, has also, on some

occasions, been employed in chemical processes, to keep a

solution in a state of agitation. Another object to which a

similar apparatus may be applied, is the polishing of small

specimens of minerals for optical experiments.



Chapter 6



Saving time in Natural Operations



    47. The process of tanning will furnish us with a striking

illustration of the power of machinery in accelerating certain

processes in which natural operations have a principal effect.

The object of this art is to combine a certain principle called

tanning with every particle of the skin to be tanned. This, in

the ordinary process, is accomplished by allowing the skins to

soak in pits containing a solution of tanning matter: they remain

in the pits six, twelve, or eighteen months; and in some

instances (if the hides are very thick), they are exposed to the

operation for two years, or even during a longer period. This

length of time is apparently required in order to allow the

tanning matter to penetrate into the interior of a thick hide.

The improved process consists in placing the hides with the

solution of tan in close vessels, and then exhausting the air.

The effect is to withdraw any air which may be contained in the

pores of the hides, and to aid capillary attraction by the

pressure of the atmosphere in forcing the tan into the interior

of the skins. The effect of the additional force thus brought

into action can be equal only to one atmosphere, but a further

improvement has been made: the vessel containing the hides is,

after exhaustion, filled up with a solution of tan; a small

additional quantity is then. injected with a forcing-pump. By

these means any degree of pressure may be given which the

containing vessel is capable of supporting; and it has been found

that. by employing such a method, the thickest hides may be

tanned in six weeks or two months.

    48. The same process of injection might be applied to

impregnate timber with tar, or any other substance capable of

preserving it from decay. and if it were not too expensive, the

deal floors of houses might thus be impregnated with alumine or

other substances, which would render them much less liable to be

accidentally set on fire. In some cases it might be useful to

impregnate woods with resins, varnish, or oil; and wood saturated

with oil might, in some instances, be usefully employed in

machinery for giving a constant, but very minute supply of that

fluid to iron or steel, against which it is worked. Some idea of

the quantity of matter which can be injected into wood by great

pressure, may be formed, from considering the fact stated by Mr

Scoresby, respecting an accident which occurred to a boat of one

of our whaling-ships. The harpoon having been struck into the

fish, the whale in this instance, dived directly down, and

carried the boat along with him. On returning to the surface the

animal was killed, but the boat, instead of rising, was found

suspended beneath the whale by the rope of the harpoon; and on

drawing it up, every part of the wood was found to be so

completely saturated with water as to sink immediately to the

bottom.

    49. The operation of bleaching linen in the open air is one

for which considerable time is necessary; and although it does

not require much labour, yet, from the risk of damage and of

robbery from long /exposure, a mode of shortening the process was

highly desirable. The method now practised, although not

mechanical, is such a remarkable instance of the application of

science to the practical purposes of manufactures, that in

mentioning the advantages derived from shortening natural

operations, it would have been scarcely pardonable to have

omitted all allusion to the beautiful application of chlorine, in

combination with lime, to the art of bleaching.

    50. Another instance more strictly mechanical occurs in some

countries where fuel is expensive, and the heat of the sun is not

sufficient to evaporate the water from brine springs. The water

is first pumped up to a reservoir, and then allowed to fall in

small streams through faggots. Thus it becomes divided; and,

presenting a large surface, evaporation is facilitated, and the.

brine which is collected in the vessels below the faggots is

stronger than that which was pumped up. After thus getting rid of

a large part of the water, the remaining portion is driven off by

boiling. The success of this process depends on the condition of

the atmosphere with respect to moisture. If the air, at the time

the brine falls through the faggots, holds in solution as much

moisture as it can contain in an invisible state, no more can be

absorbed from the salt water, and the labour expended in pumping

is entirely wasted. The state of the air, as to dryness, is

therefore an important consideration in fixing the time when this

operation is to be performed; and an attentive examination of its

state, by means of the hygrometer, might be productive of some

economy of labour.

    51. In some countries, where wood is scarce, the evaporation

of salt water is carried on by a large collection of ropes which

are stretched perpendicularly. In passing down the ropes, the

water deposits the sulphate of lime which it held in solution,

and gradually incrusts them, so that in the course of twenty

years, when they are nearly rotten, they are still sustained by

the surrounding incrustation, thus presenting the appearance of a

vast collection of small columns.

    52. Amongst natural operations perpetually altering the

surface of our globe, there are some which it would be

advantageous to accelerate. The wearing down of the rocks which

impede the rapids of navigable rivers, is one of this class. A

very beautiful process for accomplishing this object has been

employed in America. A boat is placed at the bottom of the rapid,

and kept in its position by a long rope which is firmly fixed on

the bank of the river near the top. An axis, having a wheel

similar to the paddle-wheel of a steamboat fixed at each end of

it, is placed across the boat; so that the two wheels and their

connecting axis shall revolve rapidly, being driven by the force

of the passing current. Let us now imagine several beams of wood

shod with pointed iron fixed at the ends of strong levers,

projecting beyond the bow of the boat, as in the annexed

representation.

    If these levers are at liberty to move up and down, and if

one or more projecting pieces, called cams, are fixed on the axis

opposite to the end of each lever, the action of the stream upon

the wheels will keep up a perpetual succession of blows. The

sharp-pointed shoe striking upon the rock at the bottom, will

continually detach small pieces, which the stream will

immediately carry off. Thus, by the mere action of the river

itself, a constant and most effectual system of pounding the rock

at its bottom is established. A single workman may, by the aid of

a rudder, direct the boat to any required part of the stream; and

when it is necessary to move up the rapid, as the channel is cut,

he can easily cause the boat to advance by means of a capstan.

    53. When the object of the machinery just described has been

accomplished, and the channel is sufficiently deep, a slight

alteration converts the apparatus to another purpose almost

equally advantageous. The stampers and the projecting pieces on

the axis are removed, and a barrel of wood or metal, surrounding

part of the axis, and capable, at pleasure, of being connected

with, or disconnected from the axis itself, is substituted. The

rope which hitherto fastened the boat, is now fixed to this

barrel; and if the barrel is loose upon the axis, the

paddle-wheel makes the axis only revolve, and the boat remains in

its place: but the moment the axis is attached to its surrounding

barrel, this begins to turn, and winding up the rope, the boat is

gradually drawn up against the stream; and may be employed as a

kind of tug-boat for vessels which have occasion to ascend the

rapid. When the tug-boat reaches the summit the barrel is

released from the axis, and friction being applied to moderate

its velocity, the boat is allowed to descend.

    54. Clocks occupy a very high place amongst instruments by

means of which human time is economized: and their multiplication

in conspicuous places in large towns is attended with many

advantages. Their position, nevertheless, in London, is often

very ill chosen; and the usual place, halfway up on a high

steeple, in the midst of narrow streets, in a crowded city, is

very unfavourable, unless the church happen to stand out from the

houses which form the street. The most eligible situation for a

clock is, that it should project considerably into the street at

some elevation, with a dial-plate on each side, like that which

belonged to the old church of St Dunstan, in Fleet Street, so

that passengers in both directions would have their attention

directed to the hour.

    55. A similar remark applies, with much greater force, to the

present defective mode of informing the public of the position of

the receiving houses for the twopenny and general post. In the

lowest corner of the window of some attractive shop is found a

small slit, with a brass plate indicating its important office so

obscurely. that it seems to be an object rather to prevent its

being conspicuous. No striking sign assists the anxious enquirer,

who, as the moments rapidly pass which precede the hour of

closing, torments the passenger with his enquiries for the

nearest post-office. He reaches it, perhaps, just as it is

closed; and must then either hasten to a distant part of the town

in order to procure the admission of his letters. or give up the

idea of forwarding them by that post; and thus, if they are

foreign letters, he may lose, perhaps, a week or a fortnight by

waiting for the next packet.

    The inconvenience in this and in some other cases, is of

perpetual and everyday occurrence; and though, in the greater

part of the individual cases, it may be of trifling moment, the

sum of all these produces an amount, which it is always worthy of

the government of a large and active population to attend to. The

remedy is simple and obvious: it would only be necessary, at each

letter-box, to have a light frame of iron projecting from the

house over the pavement, and carrying the letters G. P., or T.

P., or any other distinctive sign. All private signs are at

present very properly prohibited from projecting into the street:

the passenger, therefore, would at once know where to direct his

attention, in order to discover a post-office; and those

letter-boxes which occurred in the great thoroughfares could not

fail to be generally known.



Chapter 7



Exerting Forces Too Great for Human Power, and Executing

Operations Too Delicate for Human Touch





    56. It requires some skill and a considerable apparatus to

enable many men to exert their whole force at a given point; and

when this number amounts to hundreds or to thousands, additional

difficulties present themselves. If ten thousand men were hired

to act simultaneously, it would be exceedingly difficult to

discover whether each exerted his whole force, and consequently,

to be assured that each man did the duty for which he was paid.

And if still larger bodies of men or animals were necessary, not

only would the difficulty of directing them become greater, but

the expense would increase from the necessity of transporting

food for their subsistence.

    The difficulty of enabling a large number of men to exert

their force at the same instant of time has been almost obviated

by the use of sound. The whistle of the boatswain performs this

service on board ships; and in removing, by manual force, the

vast mass of granite, weighing above 1,400 tons, on which the

equestrian figure of Peter the Great is placed at St Petersburgh,

a drummer was always stationed on its summit to give the signal

for the united efforts of the workmen.

    An ancient Egyptian drawing was discovered a few years since,

by Champollion, in which a multitude of men appeared harnessed to

a huge block of stone, on the top of which stood a single

individual with his hands raised above his head, apparently in

the act of clapping them, for the purpose of insuring the

exertion of their combined force at the same moment of time.

    57. In mines, it is sometimes necessary to raise or lower

great weights by capstans requiring the force of more than one

hundred men. These work upon the surface; but the directions must

be communicated from below, perhaps from the depth of two hundred

fathoms. This communication, however, is accomplished with ease

and certainty by signals: the usual apparatus is a kind of

clapper placed on the surface close to the capstan, so that every

man may hear, and put in motion from below by a rope passing up

the shaft.

    At Wheal Friendship mine in Cornwall, a different contrivance

is employed: there is in that mine an inclined plane, passing

underground about two-thirds of a mile in length. Signals are

communicated by a continuous rod of metal. which being struck

below, the blow is distinctly heard on the surface.

    58. In all our larger manufactories numerous instances occur

of the application of the power of steam to overcome resistances

which it would require far greater expense to surmount by means

of animal labour. The twisting of the largest cables, the

rolling, hammering, and cutting large masses of iron, the

draining of our mines, all require enormous exertions of physical

force continued for considerable periods of time. Other means are

had recourse to when the force required is great, and the space

through which it is to act is small. The hydraulic press of

Bramah can, by the exertion of one man, produce a pressure of

1,500 atmospheres; and with such an instrument a hollow cylinder

of wrought iron three inches thick has been burst. In rivetting

together the iron plates, out of which steam-engine boilers are

made, it is necessary to produce as close a joint as possible.

This is accomplished by using the rivets red-hot: while they are

in that state the two plates of iron are rivetted together, and

the contraction which the rivet undergoes in cooling draws them

together with a force which is only limited by the tenacity of

the metal of which the rivet itself is made.

    59. It is not alone in the greater operations of the engineer

or the manufacturer, that those vast powers which man has called

into action, in availing himself of the agency of steam, are

fully developed. Wherever the individual operation demanding

little force for its own performance is to be multiplied in

almost endless repetition, commensurate power is required. It is

the same 'giant arm' which twists 'the largest cable', that spins

from the cotton plant an 'almost gossamer thread'. Obedient to

the hand which called into action its resistless powers, it

contends with the ocean and the storm, and rides triumphant

through dangers and difficulties unattempted by the older modes

of navigation. It is the same engine that, in its more regulated

action, weaves the canvas it may one day supersede. or, with

almost fairy fingers, entwines the meshes of the most delicate

fabric that adorns the female form.(1*)

    60. The Fifth Report of the Select Committee of the House of

Commons on the Holyhead Roads furnishes ample proof of the great

superiority of steam vessels. The following extracts are taken

from the evidence of Captain Rogers, the commander of one of the

packets:



Question. Are you not perfectly satisfied. from the experience

you have had. that the steam vessel you command is capable of

performing what no sailing vessel can do?

Answer. Yes.



Question. During your passage from Gravesend to the Downs, could

any square-rigged vessel, from a first-rate down to a sloop of

war, have performed the voyage you did in the time you did it in

the steamboat?

Answer. No: it was impossible. In the Downs we passed several

Indiamen, and 150 sail there that could not move down the

channel: and at the back of Dungeness we passed 120 more.



Question. At the time you performed that voyage, with the weather

you have described, from the Downs to Milford. if that weather

had continued twelve months, would any square-rigged vessel have

performed it?

Answer. They would have been a long time about it: probably,

would have been weeks instead of days. A sailing vessel would not

have beat up to Milford, as we did, in twelve months.



    61. The process of printing on the silver paper, which is

necessary for bank-notes, is attended with some inconvenience,

from the necessity of damping the paper previously to taking the

impression. It was difficult to do this uniformly. and in the old

process of dipping a parcel of several sheets together into a

vessel of water, the outside sheets becoming much more wet than

the others, were very apt to be torn. A method has been adopted

at the Bank of Ireland which obviates this inconvenience. The

whole quantity of paper to be damped is placed in a close vessel

from which the air is exhausted; water is then admitted, and

every leaf is completely wetted; the paper is then removed to a

press, and all the superfluous moisture is squeezed out.

    62. The operation of pulverizing solid substances and of

separating the powders of various degrees of fineness, is common

in the arts: and as the best graduated sifting fails in effecting

this separation with sufficient delicacy, recourse is had to

suspension in a fluid medium. The substance when reduced by

grinding to the finest powder is agitated in water. which is then

drawn off: the coarsest portion of the suspended matter first

subsides, and that which requires the longest time to fall down

is the finest. In this manner even emery powder, a substance of

great density, is separated into the various degrees of fineness

which are required. Flints, after being burned and ground, are

suspended in water, in order to mix them intimately with clay,

which is also suspended in the same fluid. for the formation of

porcelain. The water is then in part evaporated by heat, and the

plastic compound, out of which our most beautiful porcelain is

formed, remains. It is a curious fact, and one which requires

further examination than it has yet received, that, if this

mixture be suffered to remain long at rest before it is worked

up, it becomes useless; for it is then found that the silex,

which at first was uniformly mixed, becomes aggregated together

in small lumps. This parallel to the formation of flints in the

chalk strata deserves attention.(2*)

    63. The slowness with which powders subside, depends partly

on the specific gravity of the substance, and partly on the

magnitude of the particles themselves. Bodies, in falling through

a resisting medium, after a certain time acquire a uniform

velocity, which is called their terminal velocity, with which

they continue to descend: when the particles are very small, and

the medium dense, as water, this terminal velocity is soon

arrived at. Some of the finer powders even of emery require

several hours to subside through a few feet of water, and the mud

pumped up into our cisterns by some of the water companies is

suspended during a still longer time. These facts furnish us with

some idea of the great extent over which deposits of river mud

may be spread; for if the mud of any river whose waters enter the

Gulf Stream, sink through one foot in an hour, it might be

carried by that stream 1,500 miles before it had sunk to the

depth of 600 or 700 feet.

    64. A number of small filaments of cotton project from even

the best spun thread, and when this thread is woven into muslin

they injure its appearance. To cut these off separately is quite

impossible, but they are easily removed by passing the muslin

rapidly over a cylinder of iron kept at a dull red heat: the time

during which each portion of the muslin is in contact with the

red-hot iron is too short to heat it to the burning point; but

the filaments being much finer, and being pressed close to the

hot metal, are burnt.

    The removal of these filaments from patent net is still more

necessary for its perfection. The net is passed at a moderate

velocity through a flame of gas issuing from a very long and

narrow slit. Immediately above the flame a long funnel is fixed,

which is connected with a large air-pump worked by a

steam-engine. The flame is thus drawn forcibly through the net,

and all the filaments on both sides of it are burned off at one

operation. Previously to this application of the air-pump, the

net acting in the same way, although not to the same extent, as

the wire-gauze in Davy's safety lamp, cooled down the flame so as

to prevent the combustion of the filaments on the upper side: the

air-pump by quickening the current of ignited gas, removes this

inconvenience.



NOTES:



1. The importance and diversified applications of the steam

engine were most ably enforced in the speeches made at a public

meeting held (June 1824) for the purpose of proposing the

ereection of a monument to the memory of James Watt; these were

subsequently printed.



2. Some observations on the subject, by Dr Fitton, occur in the

appendix to Captain King's Survey of the Coast of Australia, vol.

ii, p. 397. London, 1826.



Chapter 8



Registering Operations



    65. One great advantage which we may derive from machinery is

from the check which it affords against the inattention, the

idleness, or the dishonesty of human agents. Few occupations are

more wearisome than counting a series of repetitions of the same

fact; the number of paces we walk affords a tolerably good

measure of distance passed over, but the value of this is much

enhanced by possessing an instrument, the pedometer, which will

count for us the number of steps we have made. A piece of

mechanism of this kind is sometimes applied to count the number

of turns made by the wheel of a carriage, and thus to indicate

the distance travelled: an instrument, similar in. Its object,

but differing in its construction, has been used for counting the

number of strokes made by a steam-engine, and the number of coins

struck in a press. One of the simplest instruments for counting

any series of operations, was contrived by Mr Donkin.(1*)

    66. Another instrument for registering is used in some

establishments for calendering and embossing. Many hundred

thousand yards of calicoes and stuffs undergo these operations

weekly; and as the price paid for the process is small, the value

of the time spent in measuring them would bear a considerable

proportion to the profit. A machine has, therefore, been

contrived for measuring and registering the length of the goods

as they pass rapidly through the hands of the operator, by which

all chance of erroneous counting is avoided.

    67. Perhaps the most useful contrivance of this kind, is one

for ascertaining the vigilance of a watchman. It is a piece of

mechanism connected with a clock placed in an apartment to which

the watchman has not access; but he is ordered to pull a string

situated in a certain part of his round once in every hour. The

instrument, aptly called a tell-tale, informs the owner whether

the man has missed any, and what hours during the night.

    68. It is often of great importance, both for regulations of

excise as well as for the interest of the proprietor, to know the

quantity of spirits or of other liquors which have been drawn off

by those persons who are allowed to have access to the vessels

during the absence of the inspectors or principals. This may be

accomplished by a peculiar kind of stop-cock - which will, at

each opening, discharge only a certain measure of fluid the

number of times the cock has been turned being registered by a

counting apparatus accessible only to the master.

    69. The time and labour consumed in gauging the contents of

casks partly filled, has led to an improvement which. by the

simplest means, obviates a considerable inconvenience, and

enables any person to read off, on a scale, the number of gallons

contained in any vessel, as readily as he does the degree of heat

indicated by his thermometer. A small stop-cock connects the

bottom of the cask with a glass tube of narrow bore fixed to a

scale on the side of the cask, and rising a little above its top.

The plug of the cock may be turned into three positions: in the

first, it cuts off all communication with the cask: in the

second, it opens a communication between the cask and the glass

tube: and, in the third. It cuts off the connection between the

cask and the tube, and opens a communication between the tube and

any vessel held beneath the cock to receive its contents. The

scale of the tube is graduated by pouring into the cask

successive quantities of water, while the communication between

the cask and the tube is open. Lines are then drawn on the scale

opposite the places in the tube to which the water rises at each

addition, and the scale being thus formed by actual

measurement,(2*) the contents of each cask are known by

inspection. and the tedious process of gauging is altogether

dispensed with. Other advantages accrue from this simple

contrivance, in the great economy of time which it introduces in

making mixtures of different spirits, in taking stock, and in

receiving spirit from the distiller.

    70. The gas-meter, by which the quantity of gas used by each

consumer is ascertained, is another instrument of this kind. They

are of various forms, but all of them intended to register the

number of cubic feet of gas which has been delivered. It is very

desirable that these meters should be obtainable at a moderate

price, and that every consumer should employ them; because, by

making each purchaser pay only for what he consumes, and by

preventing that extravagant waste of gas which we frequently

observe, the manufacturer of gas will be enabled to make an equal

profit at a diminished price to the consumer.

    71. The sale of water by the different companies in London,

might also, with advantage. be regulated by a meter. If such a

system were adopted, much water which is now allowed to run to

waste would be saved. and an unjust inequality between the rates

charged on different houses by the same company be avoided.

    72. Another most important object to which a meter might be

applied, would be to register the quantity of water passing into

the boilers of steam-engines. Without this, our knowledge of the

quantity evaporated by different boilers, and with fireplaces of

different constructions, as well as our estimation of the duty of

steam-engines, must evidently be imperfect.

    73. Another purpose to which machinery for registering

operations is applied with much advantage is the determination of

the average effect of natural or artificial agents. The mean

height of the barometer, for example, is ascertained by noting

its height at a certain number of intervals during the

twenty-four hours. The more these intervals are contracted. the

more correctly will the mean be ascertained; but the true mean

ought to be influenced by each momentary change which has

occurred. Clocks have been proposed and made with this object, by

which a sheet of paper is moved, slowly and uniformly, before a

pencil fixed to a float upon the surface of the mercury in the

cup of the barometer. Sir David Brewster proposed, several years

ago. to suspend a barometer, and swing it as a pendulum. The

variations in the atmosphere would thus alter the centre of

oscillation, and the comparison of such an instrument with a good

clock, would enable us to ascertain the mean altitude of the

barometer during any interval of the observer's absence.(3*)

    An instrument for measuring and registering the quantity of

rain, was invented by Mr John Taylor, and described by him in the

Philosophical Magazine. It consists of an apparatus in which a

vessel that receives the rain falling into the reservoir tilts

over as soon as it is full, and then presents another similar

vessel to be filled, which in like manner, when full, tilts the

former one back again. The number of times these vessels are

emptied is registered by a train of wheels; and thus, without the

presence of the observer, the quantity of rain falling during a

whole year may be measured and recorded.

    Instruments might also be contrived to determine the average

force of traction of horses - of the wind - of a stream or of any

irregular and fluctuating effort of animal or other natural

force.

    74. Clocks and watches may be considered as instruments for

registering the number of vibrations performed by a pendulum or a

balance. The mechanism by which these numbers are counted is

technically called a scapement. It is not easy to describe: but

the various contrivances which have been adopted for this

purpose, are amongst the most interesting and most ingenious to

which mechanical science has given birth. Working models, on an

enlarged scale, are almost necessary to make their action

understood by the unlearned reader; and, unfortunately, these are

not often to be met with. A very fine collection of such models

exists amongst the collection of instruments at the University of

Prague.

    Instruments of this kind have been made to extend their

action over considerable periods of time, and to register not

merely the hour of the day, but the days of the week, of the

month, of the year, and also to indicate the occurrence of

several astronomical phenomena.

    Repeating clocks and watches may be considered as instruments

for registering time, which communicate their information only

when the owner requires it, by pulling a string, or by some

similar application.

    An apparatus has recently been applied to watches, by which

the hand which indicates seconds leaves a small dot of ink on the

dial-plate whenever a certain stop or detent is pushed in. Thus,

whilst the eye is attentively fixed on the phenomenon to be

observed, the finger registers on the face of the watch-dial the

commencement and the end of its appearance.

    75. Several instruments have been contrived for awakening the

attention of the observer at times previously fixed upon. The

various kinds of alarums connected with clocks and watches are of

this kind. In some instances it is desirable to be able to set

them so as to give notice at many successive and distant points

of time, such as those of the arrival of given stars on the

meridian. A clock of this kind is used at the Royal Observatory

at Greenwich.

    76. An earthquake is a phenomenon of such frequent

occurrence, and so interesting, both from its fearful

devastations as well as from its connection with geological

theories, that it becomes important to possess an instrument

which shall, if possible, indicate the direction of the shock, as

well as its intensity. An observation made a few years since at

Odessa, after an earthquake which happened during the night,

suggests a simple instrument by which the direction of the shock

may be determined.

    A glass vase, partly filled with water, stood on the table of

a room in a house at Odessa; and, from the coldness of the glass,

the inner part of the vessel above the water was coated with dew.

Several very perceptible shocks of an earthquake happened between

three and four o'clock in the morning; and when the observer got

up, he remarked that the dew was brushed off at two opposite

sides of the glass by a wave which the earthquake had caused in

the water. The line joining the two highest points of this wave

was, of course, that in which the shock travelled. This

circumstance, which was accidentally noticed by an engineer at

Odessa,(4*) suggests the plan of keeping, in countries subject to

earthquakes, glass vessels partly filled with treacle, or some

unctuous fluid, so that when any lateral motion is communicated

to them from the earth, the adhesion of the liquid to the glass

shall enable the observer, after some interval of time, to

determine the direction of the shock.

    In order to obtain some measure of the vertical oscillation

of the earth, a weight might be attached to a spiral spring, or a

pendulum might be sustained in a horizontal position, and a

sliding index be moved by either of them, so that the extreme

deviations should be indicated by it. This, however, would not

give even the comparative measure accurately, because a

difference in the velocity of the rising or falling of the

earth's surface would affect the instrument.



NOTES:



1. Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1819, p. 116.



2. The contrivance is due to Mr Hencky, of High Holborn, in whose

establishment it is in constant use.



3. About seven or eight years since, without being aware of Sir

David Brewster's proposal. I adapted a barometer, as a pendulum,

to the works of a common eight day clock: it remained in my

library for several months, but I have mislaid the observations

which were made.



4. Memoires de l'Academie des Sciences de Petersburgh, 6e serie,

tom. i. p. 4.



Chapter 9



Economy of the Materials Employed



    77. The precision with which all operations by machinery are

executed, and the exact similarity of the articles thus made,

produce a degree of economy in the consumption of the raw

material which is, in some cases, of great importance. The

earliest mode of cutting the trunk of a tree into planks, was by

the use of the hatchet or the adze. It might, perhaps, be first

split into three or four portions, and then each portion was

reduced to a uniform surface by those instruments. With such

means the quantity of plank produced would probably not equal the

quantity of the raw material wasted by the process: and, if the

planks were thin, would certainly fall far short of it. An

improved tool, completely reverses the case: in converting a tree

into thick planks, the saw causes a waste of a very small

fractional part; and even in reducing it to planks of only an

inch in thickness, does not waste more than an eighth part of the

raw material. When the thickness of the plank is still further

reduced, as is the case in cutting wood for veneering, the

quantity of material destroyed again begins to bear a

considerable proportion to that which is used; and hence circular

saws, having a very thin blade, have been employed for such

purposes. In order to economize still further the more valuable

woods, Mr Brunel contrived a machine which, by a system of

blades, cut off the veneer in a continuous shaving, thus

rendering the whole of the piece of timber available.

    78. The rapid improvements which have taken place in the

printing press during the last twenty years, afford another

instance of saving in the materials consumed, which has been well

ascertained by measurement, and is interesting from its

connection with literature. In the old method of inking type, by

large hemispherical balls stuffed and covered with leather, the

printer. after taking a small portion of ink from the ink-block,

was continually rolling the balls in various directions against

each other, in order that a thin layer of ink might be uniformly

spread over their surface. This he again transferred to the type

by a kind of rolling action. In such a process, even admitting

considerable skill in the operator, it could not fail to happen

that a large quantity of ink should get near the edges of the

balls, which, not being transferred to the type, became hard and

useless, and was taken off in the form of a thick black crust.

Another inconvenience also arose - the quantity of ink spread on

the block not being regulated by measure, and the number and

direction of the transits of the inking-balls over each other

depending on the will of the operator, and being consequently

irregular, it was impossible to place on the type a uniform layer

of ink, of the quantity exactly sufficient for the impression.

The introduction of cylindrical rollers of an elastic substance,

formed by the mixture of glue and treacle, superseded the

inking-balls, and produced considerable saving in the consumption

of ink: but the most perfect economy was only to be produced by

mechanism. When printing-presses, moved by the power of steam,

were introduced, the action of these rollers was found to be well

adapted to their performance; and a reservoir of ink was formed,

from which a roller regularly abstracted a small quantity at each

impression. From three to five other rollers spread this portion

uniformly over a slab (by most ingenious contrivances varied in

almost each kind of press), and another travelling roller, having

fed itself on the slab, passed and repassed over the type just

before it gave the impression. to the paper.

    In order to show that this plan of inking puts the proper

quantity of ink upon the type, we must prove, first - that the

quantity is not too little: this would soon have been discovered

from the complaints of the public and the booksellers; and,

secondly that it is not too great. This latter point was

satisfactorily established by an experiment. A few hours after

one side of a sheet of paper has been printed upon, the ink is

sufficiently dry to allow it to receive the impression upon the

other; and, as considerable pressure is made use of, the tympan

on which the side first printed is laid, is guarded from soiling

it by a sheet of paper called the set-off sheet. This paper

receives, in succession, every sheet of the work to be printed,

acquiring from them more or less of the ink, according to their

dryness, or the quantity upon them. lt was necessary in the

former process, after about one hundred impressions, to change

this set-off sheet, which then became too much soiled for further

use. In the new method of printing by machinery, no such sheet is

used, but a blanket is employed as its substitute; this does not

require changing above once in five thousand impressions, and

instances have occurred of its remaining sufficiently clean for

twenty thousand. Here, then, is a proof that the quantity of

superfluous ink put upon the paper in machine-printing is so

small, that, if multiplied by five thousand, and in some

instances even by twenty thousand, it is only sufficient to

render useless a single piece of clean cloth.(1*) The following

were the results of an accurate experiment upon the effect of the

process just described, made at one of the largest printing

establishments in the metropolis.(2*) Two hundred reams of paper

were printed off, the old method of inking with balls being

employed; two hundred reams of the same paper, and for the same

book, were then printed off in the presses which inked their own

type. The consumption of ink by the machine was to that by the

balls as four to nine, or rather less than one-half.



NOTES:



1. In the very best kind of printing, it is necessary, in the old

method, to change the set-off sheet once in twelve times. In

printing the same kind of work by machinery, the blanket is

changed once in 2000.



2. This experiment was made at the establishment of Mr Clowes, in

Stamford Street.



Chapter 10



Of the Identity of the Work When It is of the Same Kind, and its

Accuracy when of Different Kinds



    79. Nothing is more remarkable, and yet less unexpected, than

the perfect identity of things manufactured by the same tool. If

the top of a circular box is to be made to fit over the lower

part, it may be done in the lathe by gradually advancing the tool

of the sliding-rest; the proper degree of tightness between the

box and its lid being found by trial. After this adjustment, if a

thousand boxes are made, no additional care is required; the tool

is always carried up to the stop, and each box will be equally

adapted to every lid. The same identity pervades all the arts of

printing; the impressions from the same block, or the same

copperplate, have a similarity which no labour could produce by

hand. The minutest traces are transferred to all the impressions,

and no omission can arise from the inattention or unskilfulness

of the operator. The steel punch, with which the cardwadding for

a fowling-piece is cut, if it once perform its office with

accuracy, constantly reproduces the same exact circle.

    80. The accuracy with which machinery executes its work is,

perhaps, one of its most important advantages: it may, however,

be contended, that a considerable portion of this advantage may

be resolved into saving of time; for it generally happens, that

any improvement in tools increases the quantity of work done in a

given time. Without tools, that is, by the mere efforts of the

human hand, there are, undoubtedly, multitudes of things which it

would be impossible to make. Add to the human hand the rudest

cutting instrument, and its powers are enlarged: the fabrication

of many things then becomes easy, and that of others possible

with great labour. Add the saw to the knife or the hatchet, and

other works become possible, and a new course of difficult

operations is brought into view, whilst many of the former are

rendered easy. This observation is applicable even to the most

perfect tools or machines. It would be possible for a very

skilful workman, with files and polishing substances, to form a

cylinder out of a piece of steel; but the time which this would

require would be so considerable, and the number of failures

would probably be so great, that for all practical purposes such

a mode of producing a steel cylinder might be said to be

impossible. The same process by the aid of the lathe and the

sliding-rest is the everyday employment of hundreds of workmen.

    81. Of all the operations of mechanical art, that of turning

is the most perfect. If two surfaces are worked against each

other, whatever may have been their figure at the commencement,

there exists a tendency in them both to become portions of

spheres. Either of them may become convex, and the other concave,

with various degrees of curvature. A plane surface is the line of

separation between convexity and concavity, and is most difficult

to hit; it is more easy to make a good circle than to produce a

straight line. A similar difficulty takes place in figuring

specula for telescopes; the parabola is the surface which

separates the hyperbolic from the elliptic figure, and is the

most difficult to form. If a spindle, not cylindrical at its end,

be pressed into a hole not circular, and kept constantly turning,

there is a tendency in these two bodies so situated to become

conical, or to iron be worked have circular sections. If a

triangular-pointed piece of. and it will round in a circular hole

the edges will gradually wear, become conical. These facts, if

they do not explain, at least illustrate the principles on which

the excellence of work formed in the lathe depends.



Chapter 11



Of Copying



    82. The two last-mentioned sources of excellence in the work

produced by machinery depend on a principle which pervades a very

large portion of all manufactures, and is one upon which the

cheapness of the articles produced seems greatly to depend. The

principle alluded to is that of copying, taken in its most

extensive sense. Almost unlimited pains are, in some instances,

bestowed on the original, from which a series of copies is to be

produced; and the larger the number of these copies, the more

care and pains can the manufacturer afford to lavish upon the

original. It may thus happen, that the instrument or tool

actually producing the work, shall cost five or even ten thousand

times the price of each individual specimen of its power.

    As the system of copying is of so much importance, and of

such extensive use in the arts, it will be convenient to classify

a considerable number of those processes in which it is employed.

The following enumeration however is not offered as a complete

list; and the explanations are restricted to the shortest

possible detail which is consistent with a due regard to making

the subject intelligible.

    Operations of copying are effected under the following

circumstances:



 by printing from cavities          by stamping

 by printing from surface           by punching

 by casting                         with elongation

 by moulding                        with altered dimensions



             Of printing from cavities



    83. The art of printing. in all its numerous departments, is

essentially an art of copying. Under its two great divisions,

printing from hollow lines, as in copperplate, and printing from

surface, as in block printing, are comprised numerous arts.

    84. Copperplate printing. In this instance, the copies are

made by transferring to paper, by means of pressure, a thick ink,

from the hollows and lines cut in the copper. An artist will

sometimes exhaust the labour of one or two years upon engraving a

plate, which will not, in some cases furnish above five hundred

copies in a state of perfection.

    85. Engravings on steel. This art is like that of engraving

on copper, except that the number of copies is far less limited.

A bank-note engraved as a copperplate, will not give above three

thousand impressions without a sensible deterioration. Two

impressions of a bank-note engraved on steel were examined by one

of our most eminent artists,(1*) who found it difficult to

pronounce with any confidence, which was the earliest impression.

One of these was a proof from amongst the first thousand, the

other was taken after between seventy and eighty thousand had

been printed off.

    86. Music printing. Music is usually printed from pewter

plates, on which the characters have been impressed by steel

punches. The metal being much softer than copper, is liable to

scratches, which detain a small portion of the ink. This is the

reason of the dirty appearance of printed music. A new process

has recently been invented by Mr Cowper, by which this

inconvenience will be avoided. The improved method, which give

sharpness to the characters, is still an art of copying; but it

is effected by surface printing, nearly in the same manner as

calico-printing from blocks, to be described hereafter, 96. The

method of printing music from pewter plates, although by far the

most frequently made use of, is not the only one employed, for

music is occasionally printed from stone. Sometimes also it is

printed with moveable type; and occasionally the musical

characters are printed on the paper, and the lines printed

afterwards. Specimens of both these latter modes of

music-printing may be seen in the splendid collection of

impressions from the types of the press of Bodoni at Parma: but

notwithstanding the great care bestowed on the execution of that

work, the perpetual interruption of continuity in the lines,

arising from the use of moveable types, when the characters and

lines are printed at the same time, is apparent.

    87. Calico printing from cylinders. Many of the patterns on

printed calicos are copies by printing from copper cylinders

about four or five inches in diameter, on which the desired

pattern has been previously engraved. One portion of the

cylinders is exposed to the ink, whilst an elastic scraper of

very thin steel, by being pressed forcibly against another part,

removes all superfluous ink from the surface previously to its

reaching the cloth. A piece of calico twenty-eight yards in

length rolls through this press, and is printed in four or five

minutes.

    88. Printing from perforated sheets of metal, or stencilling.

Very thin brass is sometimes perforated in the form of letters,

usually those of a name; this is placed on any substance which it

is required to mark, and a brush dipped in some paint is passed

over the brass. Those parts which are cut away admit the paint.

and thus a copy of the name appears on the substance below. This

method, which affords rather a coarse copy, is sometimes used for

paper with which rooms are covered, and more especially for the

borders. If a portion be required to match an old pattern, this

is, perhaps the most economical way of producing it.

    89. Coloured impressions of leaves upon paper may be made by

a kind of surface printing. Such leaves are chosen as have

considerable inequalities: the elevated parts of these are

covered, by means of an inking ball, with a mixture of some

pigment ground up in linseed oil; the leaf is then placed between

two sheets of paper, and being gently pressed, the impression

from the elevated parts on each side appear on the corresponding

sheets of paper.

    90. The beautiful red cotton handkerchiefs dyed at Glasgow

have their pattern given to them by a process similar to

stencilling, except that instead of printing from a pattern, the

reverse operation that of discharging a part of the colour from a

cloth already dyed - is performed. A number of handkerchiefs are

pressed with very great force between two plates of metal, which

are similarly perforated with round or lozenge-shaped holes,

according to the intended pattern. The upper plate of metal is

surrounded by a rim, and a fluid which has the property of

discharging the red dye is poured upon that plate. This liquid

passes through the holes in the metal, and also through the

calico; but, owing to the great pressure opposite all the parts

of the plates not cut away, it does not spread itself beyond the

pattern. After this, the handkerchiefs are washed, and the

pattern of each is a copy of the perforations in the metal-plate

used in the process.

    Another mode by which a pattern is formed by discharging

colour from a previously dyed cloth, is to print on it a pattern

with paste; then, passing it into the dying-vat, it comes out

dyed of one uniform colour But the paste has protected the fibres

of the cotton from the action of the dye or mordant; and when the

cloth so dyed is well washed, the paste is dissolved, and leaves

uncoloured all those parts of the cloth to which it was applied.



             Printing from surface





    91. This second department of printing is of more frequent

application in the arts than that which has just been considered.

    92. Printing from wooden blocks. A block of box wood is, in

this instance, the substance out of which the pattern is formed:

the design being sketched upon it, the workman cuts away with

sharp tools every part except the lines to be represented in the

impression. This is exactly the reverse of the process of

engraving on copper, in which every line to be represented is cut

away. The ink, instead of filling the cavities cut in the wood,

is spread upon the surface which remains, and is thence

transferred to the paper.

    93. Printing from moveable types. This is the most important

in its influence of all the arts of copying. It possesses a

singular peculiarity, in the immense subdivision of the parts

that form the pattern. After that pattern has furnished thousands

of copies, the same individual elements may be arranged again and

again in other forms, and thus supply multitudes of originals,

from each of which thousands of their copied impressions may

flow. It also possesses this advantage, that woodcuts may be used

along with the letterpress, and impressions taken from both at

the same operation.

    94. Printing from stereotype. This mode of producing copies

is very similar to the preceding. There are two modes by which

stereotype plates are produced. In that most generally adopted a

mould is taken in plaster from the moveable types, and in this

the stereotype plate is cast. Another method has been employed in

France: instead of composing the work in moveable type, it was

set up in moveable copper matrices; each matrix being in fact a

piece of copper of the same size as the type, and having the

impression of the letter sunk into its surface. instead of

projecting in relief. A stereotype plate may, it is evident, be

obtained at once from this arrangement of matrices. The objection

to the plan is the great expense of keeping so large a collection

of matrices.

    As the original composition does not readily admit of change,

stereotype plates can only be applied with advantage to cases

where an extraordinary number of copies are demanded. or where

the work consists of figures, and it is of great importance to

ensure accuracy. Trifling alterations may, however, be made in it

from time to time; and thus mathematical tables may, by the

gradual extirpation of error, at last become perfect. This mode

of producing copies possesses, in common with that by moveable

types, the advantage of admitting the use of woodcuts: the copy

of the woodcut in the stereotype plate being equally perfect.

with that of the moveable type. This union is of considerable

importance, and cannot be accomplished with engravings on copper.

    95. Lettering books. The gilt letters on the backs of books

are formed by placing a piece of gold leaf upon the leather, and

pressing upon it brass letters previously heated: these cause the

gold immediately under them to adhere to the leather, whilst the

rest of the metal is easily brushed away. When a great number of

copies of the same volume are to be lettered, it is found to be

cheaper to have a brass pattern cut with the whole of the proper

title: this is placed in a press, and being kept hot, the covers,

each having a small bit of leaf-gold placed in the proper

position. are successively brought under the brass, and stamped.

The. lettering at the back of the volume in the reader's hand was

executed in this manner.

    96. Calico printing from blocks. This is a mode of copying,

by surface printing. from the ends of small pieces of copper

wire, of various forms, fixed into a block of wood. They are all

of one uniform height, about the eighth part of an inch above the

surface of the wood, and are arranged by the maker into any

required pattern. If the block be placed upon a piece of fine

woollen cloth, on which ink of any colour has been uniformly

spread, the projecting copper wires receive a portion, which they

give up when applied to the calico to be printed. By the former

method of printing on calico, only one colour could be used; but

by this plan, after the flower of a rose, for example, has been

printed with one set of blocks, the leaves may be printed of

another colour by a different set.

    97. Printing oilcloth. After the canvas, which forms the

basis of oilcloth, has been covered with paint of one uniform

tint, the remainder of the processes which it passes through, are

a series of copyings by surface printing, from patterns formed

upon wooden blocks very similar to those employed by the calico

printer. Each colour requiring a distinct set of blocks, those

oilcloths with the greatest variety of colours are most

expensive.

    There are several other varieties of printing which we shall

briefly notice as arts of copying; which, although not strictly

surface printing, yet are more allied to it than that from

copperplates.

    98. Letter copying. In one of the modes of performing this

process, a sheet of very thin paper is damped, and placed upon

the writing to be copied. The two papers are then passed through

a rolling press, and a portion of the ink from one paper is

transferred to the other. The writing is, of course, reversed by

this process; but the paper to which it is transferred being

thin, the characters are seen through it on the other side, in

their proper position. Another common mode of copying letters is

by placing a sheet of paper covered on both sides with a

substance prepared from lamp-black, between a sheet of thin paper

and the paper on which the letter to be despatched is to be

written. If the upper or thin sheet be written upon with any hard

pointed substance, the word written with this style will be

impressed from the black paper upon both those adjoining it. The

translucency of the upper sheet, which is retained by the writer,

is in this instance necessary to render legible the writing which

is on the back of the paper. Both these arts are very limited in

their extent, the former affording two or three, the latter from

two to perhaps ten or fifteen copies at the same time.

    99. Printing on china. This is an art of copying which is

carried to a very great extent. As the surfaces to which the

impression is to be conveyed are often curved, and sometimes even

fluted, the ink, or paint, is first transferred from the copper

to some flexible substance, such as paper, or an elastic compound

of glue and treacle. It is almost immediately conveyed from this

to the unbaked biscuit, to which it more readily adheres.

    100. Lithographic printing. This is another mode of producing

copies in almost unlimited number. The original which supplies

the copies is a drawing made on a stone of a slightly porous

nature. the ink employed for tracing it is made of such greasy

materials that when water is poured over the stone it shall not

wet the lines of the drawing. When a roller covered with printing

ink, which is of an oily nature, is passed over the stone

previously wetted, the water prevents this ink from adhering to

the uncovered portions; whilst the ink used in the drawing is of

such a nature that the printing ink adheres to it. In this state,

if a sheet of paper be placed upon the stone, and then passed

under a press, the printing ink will be transferred to the paper,

leaving the ink used in the drawing still adhering to the stone.

    101. There is one application of lithographic printing which

does not appear to have received sufficient attention, and

perhaps further experiments are necessary to bring it to

perfection. It is the reprinting of works which have just arrived

from other countries. A few years ago one of the Paris newspapers

was reprinted at Brussels as soon as it arrived by means of

lithography. Whilst the ink is yet fresh, this may easily be

accomplished: it is only necessary to place one copy of the

newspaper on a lithographic stone; and by means of great pressure

applied to it in a rolling press, a sufficient quantity of the

printing ink will be transferred to the stone. By similar means,

the other side of the newspaper may be copied on another stone,

and these stones will then furnish impressions in the usual way.

If printing from stone could be reduced to the same price per

thousand as that from moveable types, this process might be

adopted with great advantage for the supply of works for the use

of distant countries possessing the same language. For a single

copy might be printed off with transfer ink, and thus an English

work, for example, might be published in America from stone,

whilst the original, printed from moveable types, made its

appearance on the same day in England.

    102. It is much to be wished that such a method were

applicable to the reprinting of facsimiles of old and scarce

books. This, however, would require the sacrifice of two copies,

since a leaf must be destroyed for each page. Such a method of

reproducing a small impression of an old work, is peculiarly

applicable to mathematical tables, the setting up of which in

type is always expensive and liable to error.. but how long ink

will continue to be transferable to stone, from paper on which it

has been printed, must be determined by experiment. The

destruction of the greasy or oily portion of the ink in the

character of old books, seems to present the greatest impediment;

if one constituent only of the ink were removed by time, it might

perhaps be hoped, that chemical means would ultimately be

discovered for restoring it: but if this be unsuccessful, an

attempt might be made to discover some substance having a strong

affinity for the carbon of the ink which remains on the paper,

and very little for the paper itself.(2*)

    103. Lithographic prints have occasionally been executed in

colours. In such instances a separate stone seems to have been

required for each colour, and considerable care, or very good

mechanism, must have been employed to adjust the paper to each

stone. If any two kinds of ink should be discovered mutually

inadhesive, one stone might be employed for two inks; or if the

inking-roller for the second and subsequent colours had portions

cut away corresponding to those parts of the stone inked by the

previous ones, then several colours might be printed from the

same stone: but these principles do not appear to promise much,

except for coarse subjects.

    104. Register printing. It is sometimes thought necessary to

print from a wooden block, or stereotype plate, the same pattern

reversed upon the opposite side of the paper. The effect of this,

which is technically called Register printing, is to make it

appear as if the ink had penetrated through the paper, and

rendered the pattern visible on the other side. If the subject

chosen contains many fine lines, it seems at first sight

extremely difficult to effect so exact a super position of the

two patterns, on opposite sides of the same piece of paper, that

it shall be impossible to detect the slightest deviation; yet the

process is extremely simple. The block which gives the impression

is always accurately brought down to the same place by means of a

hinge; this spot is covered by a piece of thin leather stretched

over it; the block is now inked, and being brought down to its

place, gives an impression of the pattern to the leather: it is

then turned back; and being inked a second time, the paper

intended to be printed is placed upon the leather, when the block

again descending, the upper surface of the paper is printed from

the block, and its undersurface takes up the impression from the

leather. It is evident that the perfection of this mode of

printing depends in a great measure on finding some soft

substance like leather, which will take as much ink as it ought

from the block, and which will give it up most completely to

paper. Impressions thus obtained are usually fainter on the lower

side; and in order in some measure to remedy this defect, rather

more ink is put on the block at the first than at the second

impression.



             Of copying by casting



    105. The art of casting, by pouring substances in a fluid

state into a would which retains them until they become solid, is

essentially an art of copying; the form of the thing produced

depending entirely upon that of the pattern from which it was

formed.

    106. Of casting iron and other metals. Patterns of wood or

metal made from drawings are the originals from which the moulds

for casting are made: so that, in fact, the casting itself is a

copy of the mould; and the mould is a copy of the pattern. In

castings of iron and metals for the coarser purposes, and, if

they are afterwards to be worked. even for the finer machines,

the exact resemblance amongst the things produced, which takes

place in many of the arts to which we have alluded, is not

effected in the first instance, nor is this necessary. As the

metals shrink in cooling, the pattern is made larger than the

intended copy; and in extricating it from the sand in which it is

moulded, some little difference will occur in the size of the

cavity which it leaves. In smaller works. where accuracy is more

requisite, and where few or no after operations are to be

performed, a mould of metal is employed which has been formed

with considerable care. Thus, in casting bullets, which ought to

be perfectly spherical and smooth, an iron instrument is used, in

which a cavity has been cut and carefully ground; and, in order

to obviate the contraction in cooling, a jet is left which may

supply the deficiency of metal arising from that cause, and which

is afterwards cut off. The leaden toys for children are cast in

brass moulds which open, and in which have been graved or

chiselled the figures intended to be produced.

    107. A very beautiful mode of representing small branches of

the most delicate vegetable productions in bronze has been

employed by Mr Chantrey. A small strip of a fir-tree, a branch of

holly, a curled leaf of broccoli, or any other vegetable

production, is suspended by one end in a small cylinder of paper

which is placed for support within a similarly formed tin case.

The finest river silt, carefully separated from all the coarser

particles. and mixed with water, so as to have the consistency of

cream. is poured into the paper cylinder by small portions at a

time. carefully shaking the plant a little after each addition,

in order that its leaves may be covered, and that no bubbles of

air may be left. The plant and its mould are now allowed to dry,

and the yielding nature of the paper allows the loamy coating to

shrink from the outside.  When this is dry it is surrounded by a

coarser substance; and, finally, we have the twig with all its

leaves embedded in a perfect mould. This mould is carefully

dried, and then gradually heated to a red heat. At the ends of

some of the leaves or shoots, wires have been left to afford

airholes by their removal, and in this state of strong ignition a

stream of air is directed into the hole formed by the end of the

branch. The consequence is, that the wood and leaves which had

been turned into charcoal by the fire, are now converted into

carbonic acid by the current of air; and, after some time, the

whole of the solid matter of which the plant consisted is

completely removed, leaving a hollow mould, bearing on its

interior all the minutest traces of its late vegetable occupant.

When this process is completed, the mould being still kept at

nearly a red heat, receives the fluid metal, which, by its

weight, either drives the very small quantity of air, which at

that high temperature remains behind, out very through the

airholes, or compresses it into the pores of very porous

substance of which the mould is formed.

    108. When the form of the object intended to be cast is such

that the pattern cannot be extricated from its mould of sand or

plaster, it becomes necessary to make the pattern with wax, or

some other easily fusible substance. The sand or plaster is

moulded round this pattern, and, by the application of heat, the

wax is extricated through an opening left purposely for its

escape.

    109. It is often desirable to ascertain the form of the

internal cavities, inhabited by molluscous animals, such as those

of spiral shells, and of the various corals. This may be

accomplished by filling them with fusible metal, and dissolving

the substance of the shell by muriatic acid; thus a metallic

solid will remain which exactly filled all the cavities. If such

forms are required in silver, or any other difficulty fusible

metal, the shells may be filled with wax or resin, then dissolved

away; and the remaining waxen form may serve as the pattern from

which a plaster mould may be made for casting the metal. Some

nicety will be required in these operations; and perhaps the

minuter cavities can only be filled under an exhausted receiver.

    110. Casting in plaster. This is a mode of copying applied to

a variety of purposes: to produce accurate representations of the

human form - of statues - or of rare fossils - to which latter

purpose it has lately been applied with great advantage. In all

casting, the first process is to make the mould; and plaster is

the substance which is almost always employed for the purpose.

The property which it possesses of remaining for a short time in

a state of fluidity, renders it admirably adapted to this object,

and adhesion, even to an original of plaster, is effectually

prevented by oiling the surface on which it is poured. The mould

formed round the subject which is copied, removed in separate

pieces and then reunited, is that in which the copy is cast. This

process gives additional utility and value to the finest works of

art. The students of the Academy at Venice are thus enabled to

admire the sculptured figures of Egina, preserved in the gallery

at Munich; as well as the marbles of the Parthenon, the pride of

our own Museum. Casts in plaster of the Elgin marbles adorn many

of the academies of the Continent; and the liberal employment of

such presents affords us an inexpensive and permanent source of

popularity.

    111. Casting in wax. This mode of copying, aided by proper

colouring, offers the most successful imitations of many objects

of natural history, and gives an air of reality to them which

might deceive even the most instructed. Numerous figures of

remarkable persons, having the face and hands formed in wax, have

been exhibited at various times; and the resemblances have, in

some instances been most striking. But whoever would see the art

of copying in wax carried to the highest perfection, should

examine the beautiful collection of fruit at the house of the

Horticultural Society. the model of the magnificent flower of the

new genus Rafflesia - the waxen models of the internal parts of

the human body which adorn the anatomical gallery of the Jardin

des Plantes at Paris, and the Museum at Florence - or the

collection of morbid anatomy at the University of Bologna. The

art of imitation by wax does not usually afford the multitude of

copies which flow from many similar operations. This number is

checked by the subsequent stages of the process, which, ceasing

to have the character of copying by a tool or pattern, become

consequently more expensive. In each individual production, form

alone is given by casting; the colouring must be the work of the

pencil, guided by the skill of the artist.



                Of copying by moulding



    112. This method of producing multitudes of individuals

having an exact resemblance to each other in external shape, is

adopted very widely in the arts. The substances employed are,

either naturally or by artificial preparation, in a soft or

plastic state; they are then compressed by. mechanical force,

sometimes assisted by heat, into a mould of the required form.

    113. Of bricks and tiles. An oblong box of wood fitting upon

a bottom fixed to the brickmaker's bench, is the mould from which

every brick is formed. A portion of the plastic mixture of which

the bricks consist is made ready by less skilful hands: the

workman first sprinkles a little sand into the mould, and then

throws the clay into it with some force; at the same time rapidly

working it with his fingers, so as to make it completely close up

to the corners. He next scrapes off, with a wetted stick, the

superfluous clay, and shakes the new-formed brick dexterously out

of its mould upon a piece of board, on which it is removed by

another workman to the place appointed for drying it. A very

skilful moulder has occasionally, in a long summer's day,

delivered from ten to eleven thousand bricks; but a fair average

day's work is from five to six thousand. Tiles of. various kinds

and forms are made of finer materials, but by the same system of

moulding. Among the ruins of the city of Gour, the ancient

capital of Bengal, bricks are found having projecting ornaments

in high relief: these appear to have been formed in a mould, and

subsequently glazed with a coloured glaze. In Germany, also,

brickwork has been executed with various ornaments. The cornice

of the church of St Stephano, at Berlin, is made of large blocks

of brick moulded into the form required by the architect. At the

establishment of Messrs Cubitt, in Gray's Inn Lane, vases,

cornices, and highly ornamented capitals of columns are thus

formed which rival stone itself in elasticity, hardness, and

durability.

    114. Of embossed china. Many of the forms given to those

beautiful specimens of earthenware which constitute the equipage

of our breakfast and our dinner-tables, cannot be executed in the

lathe of the potter. The embossed ornaments on the edges of the

plates, their polygonal shape, the fluted surface of many of the

vases, would all be difficult and costly of execution by the

hand; but they become easy and comparatively cheap, when made by

pressing the soft material out of which they are formed into a

hard mould. The care and skill bestowed on the preparation of

that mould are repaid by the multitude it produces. In many of

the works of the china manufactory, one part only of the article

is moulded; the upper surface of the plate, for example, whilst

the under side is figured by the lathe. In some instances, the

handle, or only a few ornaments, are moulded, and the body of the

work is turned.

    115. Glass seals. The process of engraving upon gems requires

considerable time and skill. The seals thus produced can

therefore never become common. Imitations, however, have been

made of various degrees of resemblance. The colour which is given

to glass is, perhaps, the most successful part of the imitation.

A small cylindrical rod of coloured glass is heated in the flame

of a blowpipe, until the extremity becomes soft. The operator

then pinches it between the ends of a pair of nippers, which are

formed of brass, and on one side of which the device intended for

the seal has been carved in relief. When the mould has been well

finished and care is taken in heating the glass properly, the

seals thus produced are not bad imitations; and by this system of

copying they are so multiplied, that the more ordinary kinds are

sold at Birmingham for three pence a dozen.

    116. Square glass bottles. The round forms which are usually

given to vessels of glass are readily produced by the expansion

of the air with which they are blown. It is, however, necessary

in many cases to make bottles of a square form, and each capable

of holding exactly the same quantity of fluid. It is also

frequently desirable to have imprinted on them the name of the

maker of the medicine or other liquid they are destined to

contain. A mould of iron, or of copper, is provided of the

intended size, on the inside of which are engraved the names

required. This mould, which is used in a hot state, opens into

two parts, to allow the insertion of the round, unfinished

bottle, which is placed in it in a very soft state before it is

removed from the end of the iron tube with which it was blown.

The mould is now closed, and the glass is forced against its

sides, by blowing strongly into the bottle.

    117. Wooden snuff boxes. Snuff boxes ornamented with devices,

in imitation of carved work or of rose engine turning, are sold

at a price which proves that they are only imitations. The wood,

or horn, out of which they are formed, is softened by long

boiling in water, and whilst in this state it is forced into

moulds of iron, or steel, on which are cut the requisite

patterns, where it remains exposed to great pressure until it is

dry.

    118. Horn knife handles and umbrella handles. The property

which horn possesses of becoming soft by the action of water and

of heat, fits it for many useful purposes. It is pressed into

moulds, and becomes embossed with figures in relief, adapted to

the objects to which it is to be applied. If curved, it may be

straightened; or if straight, it may be bent into any forms which

ornament or utility may require; and by the use of the mould

these forms may be multiplied in endless variety. The commoner

sorts of knives, the crooked handles for umbrellas, and a

multitude of other articles to which horn is applied, attest the

cheapness which the art of copying gives to the things formed of

this material.

    119. Moulding tortoise-shell. The same principle is applied

to things formed out of the shell of the turtle, or the land

tortoise. From the greatly superior price of the raw material,

this principle of copying is, however, more rarely employed upon

it; and the few carvings which are demanded, are usually

performed by hand.

    120. Tobacco-pipe making. This simple art is almost entirely

one of copying. The moulds are formed of iron, in two parts, each

embracing one half of the stem; the line of junction of these

parts may generally be observed running lengthwise from one end

of the pipe to the other. The hole passing to the bowl is formed

by thrusting a long wire through the clay before it is enclosed

in the mould. Some of the moulds have figures, or names, sunk in

the inside, which give a corresponding figure in relief upon the

finished pipe.

    121. Embossing upon calico. Calicoes of one colour, but

embossed all over with raised patterns, though not much worn in

this country, are in great demand in several foreign markets.

This appearance is produced by passing them between rollers, on

one of which is figured in intaglio the pattern to be transferred

to the calico. The substance of the cloth is pressed very

forcibly into the cavities thus formed, and retains its pattern

after considerable use. The watered appearance in the cover of

the volume in the reader's hands is produced in a similar manner.

A cylinder of gun-metal, on which the design of the watering is

previously cut, is pressed by screws against another cylinder,

formed out of pieces of brown paper which have been strongly

compressed together and accurately turned. The two cylinders are

made to revolve rapidly, the paper one being slightly damped,

and, after a few minutes, it takes an impression from the upper

or metal one. The glazed calico is now passed between the

rollers, its glossy surface being in contact with the metal

cylinder, which is kept hot by a heated iron enclosed within it.

Calicoes are sometimes watered by placing two pieces on each

other in such a position that the longitudinal threads of the one

are at right angles to those of the other, and compressing them

in this state between flat rollers. The threads of the one piece

produce indentations in those of the other, but they are not so

deep as when produced by the former method.

    122. Embossing upon leather. This art of copying from

patterns previously engraved on steel rollers is in most respects

similar to the preceding. The leather is forced into the

cavities, and the parts which are not opposite to any cavity are

powerfully condensed between the rollers.

    123. Swaging. This is an art of copying practised by the

smith. In order to fashion his iron and steel into the various

forms demanded by his customers, he has small blocks of steel

into which are sunk cavities of different shapes; these are

called swages, and are generally in pairs. Thus if he wants a

round bolt, terminating in a cylindrical head of larger diameter,

and having one or more projecting rims, he uses a corresponding

swaging tool; and having heated the end of his iron rod, and

thickened it by striking the end in the direction of the axis

(which is technically called upsetting), he places its head upon

one part of the lage; and whilst an assistant holds the other

part on the top of the hot iron, he strikes it several times with

his hammer, occasionally turning the head one quarter round. The

heated iron is thus forced by the blows to assume the form of the

mould into which it is impressed.

    124. Engraving by pressure. This is one of the most beautiful

examples of the art of copying carried to an almost unlimited

extent; and the delicacy with which it can be executed, and the

precision with which the finest traces of the graving tool can be

transferred from steel to copper, or even from hard steel to soft

steel, is most unexpected. We are indebted to Mr Perkins for most

of the contrivances which have brought this art at once almost to

perfection. An engraving is first made upon soft steel, which is

hardened by a peculiar process without in the least injuring its

delicacy. A cylinder of soft steel, pressed with great force

against the hardened steel engraving, is now made to roll very

slowly backward and forward over it, thus receiving the design,

but in relief. The cylinder is in its turn hardened without

injury., and if it be slowly rolled to and fro with strong

pressure on successive plates of copper, it will imprint on a

thousand of them a perfect facsimile of the original steel

engraving from which it was made. Thus the number of copies

producible from the same design may be multiplied a

thousand-fold. But even this is very far short of the limits to

which the process may be extended. The hardened steel roller,

bearing the design upon it in relief may be employed to make a

few of its first impressions upon plates of soft steel, and these

being hardened become the representatives of the original

engraving, and may in their turn be made the parents of other

rollers, each generating copperplates like their prototype. The

possible extent to which facsimiles of one original engraving may

thus be multiplied, almost confounds the imagination, and appears

to be for all practical purposes unlimited.

    This beautiful art was first proposed by Mr Perkins for the

purpose of rendering the forgery of bank notes a matter of great

difficulty; and there are two principles which peculiarly adapt

it to that object: first, the perfect identity of all the

impressions, so that any variation in the minutest line would at

once cause detection; secondly, that the original plates may be

formed by the united labours of several artists most eminent in

their respective departments; for as only one original of each

design is necessary, the expense, even of the most elaborate

engraving, will be trifling, compared with the multitude of

copies produced from it.

    125. It must, however, be admitted that the principle of

copying itself furnishes an expedient for imitating any engraving

or printed pattern, however complicated; and thus presents a

difficulty which none of the schemes devised for the prevention

of forgery appear to have yet effectually obviated. In attempting

to imitate the most perfect banknote, the first process would be

to place it with the printed side downwards upon a stone or other

substance, on which, by passing it through a rolling-press, it

might be firmly fixed. The next object would be to discover some

solvent which should dissolve the paper, but neither affect the

printing-ink, nor injure the stone or substance to which it is

attached. Water does not seem to do this effectually, and perhaps

weak alkaline or acid solutions would be tried. If, however, this

could be fully accomplished, and if the stone or other substance,

used to retain the impression, had those properties which enable

us to print from it, innumerable facsimiles of the note might

obviously be made, and the imitation would be complete. Porcelain

biscuit, which has recently been used with a black lead pencil

for memorandum books, seems in some measure adapted for such

trials, since its porosity may be diminished to any required

extent by regulating the dilution of the glazing.

    126. Gold and silver moulding. Many of the mouldings used by

jewellers consist of thin slips of metal, which have received

their form by passing between steel rollers, on which the pattern

is embossed or engraved; thus taking a succession of copies of

the devices intended.

    127. Ornamental papers. Sheets of paper coloured or covered

with gold or silver leaf, and embossed with various patterns, are

used for covering books, and for many ornamental purposes. The

figures upon these are produced by the same process, that of

passing the sheets of paper between engraved rollers.



                Of copying by stamping



    128. This mode of copying is extensively employed in the

arts. It is generally executed by means of large presses worked

with a screw and heavy flywheel. The materials on which the

copies are impressed are most frequently metals, and the process

is sometimes executed when they are hot, and in one case when the

metal is in a state between solidity and fluidity.

    129. Coins and medals. The whole of the coins which circulate

as money are produced by this mode of copying. The screw presses

are either worked by manual labour, by water, or by steam power.

The mint which was sent a few years since to Calcutta was capable

of coining 200,000 pieces a day. Medals, which usually have their

figures in higher relief than coins, are produced by similar

means; but a single blow is rarely sufficient to bring them to

perfection, and the compression of the metal which arises from

the first blow renders it too hard to receive many subsequent

blows without injury to the die. It is therefore, after being

struck, removed to a furnace, in which it is carefully heated

red-hot and annealed, after which operation it is again placed

between the dies, and receives additional blows. For medals, on

which the figures are very prominent, these processes must be

repeated many times. One of the largest medals hitherto struck

underwent them nearly a hundred times before it was completed.

    130. Ornaments for military accoutrements, and furniture.

These are usually of brass, and are stamped up out of solid or

sheet brass by placing it between dies, and allowing a heavy

weight to drop upon the upper die from a height of from five to

fifteen feet.

    131. Buttons and nail heads. Buttons embossed with crests or

other devices are produced by the same means; and some of those

which are plain receive their hemispherical form from the dies in

which they are struck. The heads of several kinds of nails which

are portions of spheres, or polyhedrons, are also formed by these

means.

    132. Of a process for copying, called in France clichee. This

curious method of copying by stamping is applied to medals, and

in some cases to forming stereotype plates. There exists a range

of temperature previous to the melting point of several of the

alloys of lead, tin, and antimony, in which the compound is

neither solid, nor yet fluid. In this kind of pasty state it is

placed in a box under a die, which descends upon it with

considerable force. The blow drives the metal into the finest

lines of the die, and the coldness of the latter immediately

solidifies the whole mass. A quantity of the half-melted metal is

scattered in all directions by the blow, and is retained by the

sides of the box in which the process is carried on. The work

thus produced is admirable for its sharpness, but has not the

finished form of a piece just leaving the coining-press: the

sides are ragged, and it must be trimmed, and its thickness

equalized in the lathe.



             Of copying by punching



    133. This mode of copying consists in driving a steel punch

through the substance to be cut, either by a blow or by pressure.

In some cases the object is to copy the aperture, and the

substance separated from the plate is rejected; in other cases

the small pieces cut out are the objects of the workman's labour.

    134. Punching iron plate for boilers. The steel punch used

for this purpose is from three-eighths to three-quarters of an

inch in diameter, and drives out a circular disk from a plate of

iron from one-quarter to five eighths of an inch thick.

    135. Punching tinned iron. The ornamental patterns of open

work which decorate the tinned and japanned wares in general use,

are rarely punched by the workman who makes them. In London the

art of punching out these patterns in screw-presses is carried on

as a separate trade; and large quantities of sheet tin are thus

perforated for cullenders, wine-strainers, borders of waiters,

and other similar purposes. The perfection and the precision to

which the art has been carried are remarkable. Sheets of copper,

too, are punched with small holes about the hundredth of an inch

in diameter, in such multitudes that more of the sheet metal is

removed than remains behind; and plates of tin have been

perforated with above three thousand holes in each square inch.

    136. The inlaid plates of brass and rosewood, called buhl

work, which ornament our furniture, are, in some instances,

formed by punching; but in this case, both the parts cut out, and

those which remain, are in many cases employed. In the remaining

illustrations of the art of copying by punching, the part made

use of is that which is punched out.

    137. Cards for guns. The substitution of a circular disk of

thin card instead of paper, for retaining in its place the charge

of a fowling-piece, is attended with considerable advantage. It

would, however, be of little avail, unless an easy method was

contrived of producing an unlimited number of cards, each exactly

fitting the bore of the barrel. The small steel tool used for

this purpose cuts out innumerable circles similar to its cutting

end, each of which precisely fills the barrel for which it was

designed.

    138. Ornaments of gilt paper. The golden stars, leaves, and

other devices, sold in shops for the purpose of ornamenting

articles made of paper and pasteboard, and other fancy works, are

cut by punches of various forms out of sheets of gilt paper.

    139. Steel chains. The chain used in connecting the

mainspring and fusee in watches and clocks, is composed of small

pieces of sheet steel, and it is of great importance that each of

these pieces should be of exactly the same size. The links are of

two sorts; one of them consisting of a single oblong piece of

steel with two holes in it, and the other formed by connecting

two of the same pieces of steel, placed parallel to each other,

and at a small distance apart, by two rivets. The two kinds of

links occur alternately in the chain: each end of the single

pieces being placed between the ends of two others, and connected

with them by a rivet passing through all three. If the rivet

holes in the pieces for the double links are not precisely at

equal distances, the chain will not be straight, and will,

consequently, be unfit for its purpose.



                 Copying with elongation



    140. In this species of copying there exists but little

resemblance between the copy and the original. It is the

cross-section only of the thing produced which is similar to the

tool through which it passes. When the substances to be operated

upon are hard, they must frequently pass in succession through

several holes, and it is in some cases necessary to anneal them

at intervals.

    141. Wire drawing. The metal to be converted into wire is

made of a cylindrical form, and drawn forcibly through circular

holes in plates of steel: at each passage it becomes smaller.

and, when finished, its section at any point is a precise copy of

the last hole through which it passed. Upon the larger kinds of

wire, fine lines may sometimes be traced, running longitudinally.

these arise from slight imperfections in the holes of the

draw-plates. For many purposes of the arts, wire, the section of

which is square or half round, is required: the same method of

making it is pursued, except that the holes through which it is

drawn are in such cases themselves square, or half-round, or of

whatever other form the wire is required to be. A species of wire

is made, the section of which resembles a star with from six to

twelve rays; this is called pinion wire, and is used by the

clockmakers. They file away all the rays from a short piece,

except from about half an inch near one end: this becomes a

pinion for a clock; and the leaves or teeth are already burnished

and finished, from having passed through the draw-plate.

    142. Tube drawing. The art of forming tubes of uniform

diameter is nearly similar in its mode of execution to wire

drawing. The sheet brass is bent round and soldered so as to form

a hollow cylinder; and if the diameter outside is that which is

required to be uniform, it is drawn through a succession of

holes, as in wire drawing: If the inside diameter is to be

uniform, a succession of steel cylinders, called triblets, are

drawn through the brass tube. In making tubes for telescopes, it

is necessary that both the inside and outside should be uniform.

A steel triblet, therefore, is first passed into the tube, which

is then drawn through a succession of holes, until the outside

diameter is reduced to the required size. The metal of which the

tube is formed is condensed between these holes and the steel

cylinder within; and when the latter is withdrawn the internal

surface appears polished. The brass tube is considerably extended

by this process, sometimes even to double its first length.

    143. Leaden pipes. Leaden pipes for the conveyance of water

were formerly made by casting; but it has been found that they

can be made both cheaper and better by drawing them through holes

in the manner last described. A cylinder of lead, of five or six

inches in diameter and about two feet long, is cast with a small

hole through its axis, and an iron triblet of about fifteen feet

in length is forced into the hole. It is then drawn through a

series of holes, until the lead is extended upon the triblet from

one end to the other, and is of the proper thickness in

proportion to the size of the pipe.

    144. Iron rolling. When cylinders of iron of greater

thickness than wire are required, they are formed by passing

wrought iron between rollers, each of which has sunk in it a

semi-cylindrical groove; and as such rollers rarely touch

accurately, a longitudinal line will usually be observed in the

cylinders so manufactured. Bar iron is thus shaped into all the

various forms of round, square, half-round, oval, etc. in which

it occurs in commerce. A particular species of moulding is thus

made, which resembles, in its section, that part of the frame of

a window which separates two adjacent panes of glass. Being much

stronger than wood, it can be considerably reduced in thickness,

and consequently offers less obstruction to the light; it is much

used for skylights.

    145. It is sometimes required that the iron thus produced

should not be of uniform thickness throughout. This is the case

in bars for railroads, where greater depth is required towards

the middle of the rail which is at the greatest distance from the

supports. This form is produced by cutting the groove in the

rollers deeper at those parts where additional strength is

required, so that the hollow which surrounds the roller would, if

it could be unwound, be a mould of the shape the iron is intended

to fit.

    146. Vermicelli. The various forms into which this paste is

made are given by forcing it through holes in tin plate. It

passes through them, and appears on the other side in long

strings. The cook makes use of the same method in preparing

butter and ornamental pastry for the table, and the confectioner

in forming cylindrical lozenges of various composition.



                Of copying with altered dimensions



    147. Of the pentagraph. This mode of copying is chiefly used

for drawings or maps: the instrument is simple; and, although

usually employed in reducing, is capable of enlarging the size of

the copy. An automaton figure, exhibited in London a short time

since, which drew profiles of its visitors, was regulated by a

mechanism on this principle. A small aperture in the wall,

opposite the seat in which the person is placed whose profile is

taken, conceals a camera lucida, which is placed in an adjoining

apartment: and an assistant, by moving a point, connected by a

pentagraph with the hand of the automaton, over the outline of

the head, causes the figure to trace a corresponding profile.

    148. By turning. The art of turning might perhaps itself be

classed amongst the arts of copying. A steel axis, called a

mandril, having a pulley attached to the middle of it, is

supported at one end either by a conical point, or by a

cylindrical collar, and at the other end by another collar,

through which it passes. The extremity which projects beyond this

last collar is formed into a screw, by which various instruments,

called chucks, can be attached to it. These chucks are intended

to hold the various materials to be submitted to the operation of

turning, and have a great variety of forms. The mandril with the

chuck is made to revolve by a strap which passes over the pulley

that is attached to it, and likewise over a larger wheel moved

either by the foot, or by its connection with steam or water

power. All work which is executed on a mandril partakes in some

measure of the irregularities in the form of that mandril; and

the perfect circularity of section which ought to exist in every

part of the work, can only be ensured by an equal accuracy in the

mandril and its collar.

    149. Rose engine turning. This elegant art depends in a great

measure on copying. Circular plates of metal called rosettes,

having various indentations on the surfaces and edges, are fixed

on the mandril, which admits of a movement either end-wise or

laterally: a fixed obstacle called the 'touch', against which the

rosettes are pressed by a spring, obliges the mandril to follow

their indentations, and thus causes the cutting tool to trace out

the same pattern on the work. The distance of the cutting tool

from the centre being usually less than the radius of the

rosette, causes the copy to be much diminished.

    150. Copying dies. A lathe has been long known in France, and

recently been used at the English mint for copying dies. A blunt

point is carried by a very slow spiral movement successively over

every part of the die to be copied, and is pressed by a weight

into all the cavities; while a cutting point connected with it by

the machine traverses the face of a piece of soft steel, in which

it cuts the device of the original die on the same or on a

diminished scale. The degree of excellence of the copy increases

in proportion as it is smaller than the original. The die of a

crown-piece will furnish by copy a very tolerable die for a

sixpence. But the chief use to be expected from this lathe is to

prepare all the coarser parts, and leave only the finer and more

expressive lines for the skill and genius of the artist.

    151. Shoe-last making engine. An instrument not very unlike

in principle was proposed for the purpose of making shoe lasts. A

pattern last of a shoe for the right foot was placed in one part

of the apparatus, and when the machine was moved, two pieces of

wood, placed in another part which had been previously adjusted

by screws, were cut into lasts greater or less than the original,

as was desired; and although the pattern was for the right foot,

one of the lasts was for the left, an effect which was produced

by merely interposing a wheel which reversed the motion between

the two pieces of wood to be cut into lasts.

    152. Engine for copying busts. Many years since, the late Mr

Watt amused himself with constructing an engine to produce copies

of busts or statues, either of the same size as the original, or

in a diminished proportion. The substances on which he operated

were various, and some of the results were shown to his friends,

but the mechanism by which they were made has never been

described. More recently, Mr Hawkins, who, nearly at the same

time, had also contrived a similar machine, has placed it in the

hands of an artist, who has made copies in ivory from a variety

of busts. The art of multiplying in different sizes the figures

of the sculptor, aided by that of rendering their acquisition

cheap through the art of casting, promises to give additional

value to his productions, and to diffuse more widely the pleasure

arising from their possession.

    153. Screw cutting. When this operation is performed in the

lathe by means of a screw upon the mandril, it is essentially an

art of copying, but it is only the number of threads in a given

length which is copied; the form of the thread, and length as

well as the diameter of the screw to be cut, are entirely

independent of those from which the copy is made. There is

another method of cutting screws in a lathe by means of one

pattern screw, which, being connected by wheels with the mandril,

guides the cutting point. In this process, unless the time of

revolution of the mandril is the same as that of the screw which

guides the cutting point, the number of threads in a given length

will be different. If the mandril move quicker than the cutting

point, the screw which is produced will be finer than the

original; if it move slower, the copy will be more coarse than

the original. The screw thus generated may be finer or coarser -

it may be larger or smaller in diameter - it may have the same or

a greater number of threads than that from which it is copied;

yet all the defects which exist in the original will be

accurately transmitted, under the modified circumstances, to

every individual generated from it.

    154. Printing from copper plates with altered dimensions.

Some very singular specimens of an art of copying, not yet made

public, were brought from Paris a few years since. A watchmaker

in that city, of the name of Gonord, had contrived a method by

which he could take from the same copperplate impressions of

different sizes, either larger or smaller than the original

design. Having procured four impressions of a parrot, surrounded

by a circle, executed in this manner, I showed them to the late

Mr Lowry, an engraver equally distinguished for his skill, and

for the many mechanical contrivances with which he enriched his

art. The relative dimensions of the several impressions were 5.5,

6.3, 8.4, 15.0, so that the largest was nearly three times the

linear size of the smallest; and Mr Lowry assured me, that he was

unable to detect any lines in one which had not corresponding

lines in the others. There appeared to be a difference in the

quantity of ink, but none in the traces of the engraving; and,

from the general appearance, it was conjectured that the largest

but one was the original impression from the copperplate.

    The means by which this singular operation was executed have

not been published; but two conjectures were formed at the time

which merit notice. It was supposed that the artist was in

possession of some method of transferring the ink from the lines

of a copperplate to the surface of some fluid, and of

retransferring the impression from the fluid to paper. If this

could be accomplished, the print would, in the first instance, be

of exactly the same size as the copper from which it was derived;

but if the fluid were contained in a vessel having the form of an

inverted cone, with a small aperture at the bottom, the liquid

might be lowered or raised in the vessel by gradual abstraction

or addition through the apex of the cone; in this case, the

surface to which the printing-ink adhered would diminish or

enlarge, and in this altered state the impression might be

retransferred to paper. It must be admitted, that this

conjectural explanation is liable to very considerable

difficulties; for, although the converse operation of taking an

impression from a liquid surface has a parallel in the art of

marbling paper, the possibility of transferring the ink from the

copper to the fluid requires to be proved.

    Another and more plausible explanation is founded on the

elastic nature of the compound of glue and treacle, a substance

already in use in transferring engravings to earthenware. It is

conjectured, that an impression from the copperplate is taken

upon a large sheet of this composition; that this sheet is then

stretched in both directions, and that the ink thus expanded is

transferred to paper. If the copy is required to be smaller than

the original, the elastic substance must first be stretched, and

then receive the impression from the copperplate: on removing the

tension it will contract, and thus reduce the size of the design.

It is possible that one transfer may not in all cases suffice; as

the extensibility of the composition of glue and treacle,

although considerable, is still limited. Perhaps sheets of India

rubber of uniform texture and thickness, may be found to answer

better than this composition; or possibly the ink might be

transferred from the copper plate to the surface of a bottle of

this gum, which bottle might, after being expanded by forcing air

into it, give up the enlarged impression to paper. As it would

require considerable time to produce impressions in this manner,

and there might arise some difficulty in making them all of

precisely the same size, the process might be rendered more

certain and expeditious by performing that part of the operation

which depends on the enlargement or diminution of the design only

once; and, instead of printing from the soft substance.

transferring the design from it to stone: thus a considerable

portion of the work would be reduced to an art already well

known, that of lithography. This idea receives some confirmation

from the fact, that in another set of specimens, consisting of a

map of St Petersburgh, of several sizes, a very short line,

evidently an accidental defect, occurs in all the impressions of

one particular size, but not in any of a different size.

    155. Machine to produce engraving from medals. An instrument

was contrived, a long time ago, and is described in the Manuel de

Tourneur, by which copperplate engravings are produced from

medals and other objects in relief. The medal and the copper are

fixed on two sliding plates at right angles to each other, so

connected that, when the plate on which the medal is fixed is

raised vertically by a screw, the slide holding the copperplate

is advanced by an equal quantity in the horizontal direction. The

medal is fixed on the vertical slide with its face towards the

copperplate, and a little above it.

    A bar, terminating at one end in a tracing point, and at the

other in a short arm, at right angles to the bar, and holding a

diamond point, is placed horizontally above the copper; so that

the tracing point shall touch the medal to which the bar is

perpendicular, and the diamond point shall touch the copperplate

to which the arm is perpendicular.

    Under this arrangement, the bar being supposed to move

parallel to itself, and consequently to the copper, if the

tracing point pass over a flat part of the medal, the diamond

point will draw a straight line of equal length upon the copper;

but, if the tracing point pass over any projecting part of the

medal, the deviation from the straight line by the diamond point,

will be exactly equal to the elevation of the corresponding point

of the medal above the rest of the surface. Thus, by the transit

of this tracing point over any line upon the medal, the diamond

will draw upon the copper a section of the medal through that

line.

    A screw is attached to the apparatus, so that if the medal be

raised a very small quantity by the screw, the copperplate will

be advanced by the same quantity, and thus a new line of section

may be drawn: and, by continuing this process, the series of

sectional lines on the copper produces the representation of the

medal on a plane: the outline and the form of the figure arising

from the sinuosities of the lines, and from their greater or less

proximity. The effect of this kind of engraving is very striking;

and in some specimens gives a high degree of apparent relief. It

has been practised on plate glass, and is then additionally

curious from the circumstance of the fine lines traced by the

diamond being invisible, except in certain lights.

    From this description, it will have been seen that the

engraving on copper must be distorted; that is to say, that the

projection on the copper cannot be the same as that which arises

from a perpendicular projection of each point of the medal upon a

plane parallel to itself. The position of the prominent parts

will be more altered than that of the less elevated; and the

greater the relief of the medal the more distorted will be its

engraved representation. Mr John Bate, son of Mr Bate, of the

Poultry, has contrived an improved machine, for which he has

taken a patent, in which this source of distortion is remedied.

The head, in the title page of the present volume, is copied from

a medal of Roger Bacon, which forms one of a series of medals of

eminent men, struck at the Royal Mint at Munich, and is the first

of the published productions of this new art.(3*)

    The inconvenience which arises from too high a relief in the

medal, or in the bust, might be remedied by some mechanical

contrivance, by which the deviation of the diamond point from the

right line (which it would describe when the tracing point

traverses a plane), would be made proportional not to the

elevation of the corresponding point above the plane of the

medal, but to its elevation above some other parallel plane

removed to a fit distance behind it. Thus busts and statues might

be reduced to any required degree of relief.

    156. The machine just described naturally suggests other

views which seem to deserve some consideration, and, perhaps,

some experiment. If a medal were placed under the tracing point

of a pentagraph, an engraving tool substituted for the pencil,

and a copperplate in the place of the paper; and if, by some

mechanism, the tracing point, which slides in a vertical plane,

could, as it is carried over the different elevations of the

medal, increase or diminish the depth of the engraved line

proportionally to the actual height of the corresponding point on

the medal, then an engraving would be produced, free at least

from any distortion, although it might be liable to objections of

a different kind. If, by any similar contrivance, instead of

lines, we could make on each point of the copper a dot, varying

in size or depth with the altitude of the corresponding point of

the medal above its plane, than a new species of engraving would

be produced: and the variety of these might again be increased,

by causing the graving point to describe very small circles, of

diameters, varying with the height of the point on the medal

above a given plane; or by making the graving tool consist of

three equidistant points, whose distance increased or diminished

according to some determinate law, dependent on the elevation of

the point represented above the plane of the medal. It would,

perhaps, be difficult to imagine the effects of some of these

kinds of engraving; but they would all possess, in common, the

property of being projections, by parallel lines, of the objects

represented, and the intensity of the shade of the ink would

either vary according to some function of the distance of the

point represented from some given plane, or it would be a little

modified by the distances from the same plane of a few of the

immediately contiguous points.

    157. The system of shading maps by means of lines of equal

altitude above the sea bears some analogy to this mode of

representing medals, and if applied to them would produce a

different species of engraved resemblance. The projections on the

plane of the medal, of the section of an imaginary plane, placed

at successive distances above it, with the medal itself, would

produce a likeness of the figure on the medal, in which all the

inclined parts of it would be dark in proportion to their

inclination. Other species of engraving might be conceived by

substituting, instead of the imaginary plane, an imaginary sphere

or other solid, intersecting the figure in the medal.

    158. Lace made by caterpillars. A most extraordinary species

of manufacture, which is in a slight degree connected with

copying, has been contrived by an officer of engineers residing

at Munich. It consists of lace, and veils, with open patterns in

them, made entirely by caterpillars. The following is the mode of

proceeding adopted: he makes a paste of the leaves of the plant,

which is the usual food of the species of caterpillar(4*) he

employs, and spreads it thinly over a stone, or other flat

substance. He then, with a camel-hair pencil dipped in olive oil,

draws upon the coating of paste the pattern he wishes the insects

to leave open. This stone is then placed in an inclined position,

and a number of the caterpillars are placed at the bottom. A

peculiar species is chosen, which spins a strong web; and the

animals commencing at the bottom, eat and spin their way up to

the top, carefully avoiding every part touched by the oil, but

devouring all the rest of the paste. The extreme lightness of

these veils, combined with some strength, is truly surprising.

One of them, measuring twenty-six and a half inches by seventeen

inches, weighed only 1.51 grains; a degree of lightness which

will appear more strongly by contrast with other fabrics. One

square yard of the substance of which these veils are made weighs

4 1/3 grains, whilst one square yard of silk gauze weighs 137

grains, and one square yard of the finest patent net weighs 262

1/2 grains. The ladies' coloured muslin dresses, mentioned in the

table subjoined, cost ten shillings per dress, and each weigh six

ounces; the cotton from which they are made weighing nearly six

and two-ninth ounces avoirdupois weight.



 Weight of one square yard of each of the following articles(5*)



                                                    Weight of

                                        Weight      cotton used

                             Value    finished of    in waking

                            per yard  one square    one square

 Description of goods       measure     yard            yard



                            s. d.    Troy grains    Troy grains



 Caterpillar veils           --         4 1/3           --

 Silk gauze 3-4 wide        1  0         137            --

 Finest patent net           --       262 1/2           --

 Fine cambric muslin         --          551            --

 6-4ths jaconet muslin      2  0         613           670

 Ladies' coloured muslin dresses 3 0     788           875

 6-4ths cambric             1  2         972          1069

 9-8ths calico              0  9         988          1085

 1/2-yard nankeen           0  8        2240          2432



    159. This enumeration, which is far from complete, of the

arts in which copying is the foundation, may be terminated with

an example which has long been under the eye of the reader;

although few, perhaps, are aware of the number of repeated

copyings of which these very pages are the subject.

    1. They are copies, by printing, from stereotype plates.

    2. These stereotype plates are copied, by the art of casting,

from moulds formed of plaster of Paris.

    3. These moulds are themselves copied by casting the plaster

in a liquid state upon the moveable types set up by the

compositor.

    [It is here that the union of the intellectual and the

mechanical departments takes place. The mysteries, however, of an

author's copying, form no part of our enquiry, although it may be

fairly remarked, that, in numerous instances, the mental far

eclipses the mechanical copyist.]

    4. These moveable types, the obedient messengers of the most

opposite thoughts, the most conflicting theories, are themselves

copies by casting from moulds of copper called matrices.

    5. The lower part of those matrices, bearing the impressions

of the letters or characters, are copies, by punching, from steel

punches on which the same characters exist in relief.

    6. These steel punches are not themselves entirely exempted

from the great principle of art. Many of the cavities which exist

in them, such as those in the middle of the punches for the

letters a, b, d, e, g, etc., are produced from other steel

punches in which these parts are in relief.

    We have thus traced through six successive stages of copying

the mechanical art of printing from stereotype plates: the

principle of copying contributing in this, as in every other

department of manufacture, to the uniformity and the cheapness of

the work produced.



NOTES:



1. The late Mr Lowry.



2. I posses a lithographic reprint of a page of a table, which

appears, from the from of the type, to have been several years

old.



3. The construction of the engraving becomes evident on examining

it with a lens of sufficient power to show the continuity of the

lines.



4. The Phalaena pardilla, which feeds on the Prunus padus.



5. Some of these weights and measures are calculated from a

statement in the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons

on Printed Cotton Goods; and the widths of the pieces there given

are presumed to be the real widths, not those by which they are

called in the retail shops.



Chapter 12



On the Method of Observing Manufacturies



    160. Having now reviewed the mechanical principles which

regulate the successful application of mechanical science to

great establishments for the production of manufactured goods, it

remains for us to suggest a few enquiries, and to offer a few

observations, to those whom an enlightened curiosity may lead to

examine the factories of this or of other countries.

    The remark - that it is important to commit to writing all

information as soon as possible after it is received, especially

when numbers are concerned - applies to almost all enquiries. It

is frequently impossible to do this at the time of visiting an

establishment, although not the slightest jealousy may exist; the

mere act of writing information as it is communicated orally, is

a great interruption to the examination of machinery. In such

cases, therefore, it is advisable to have prepared beforehand the

questions to be asked, and to leave blanks for the answers, which

may be quickly inserted, as, in a multitude of cases, they are

merely numbers. Those who have not tried this plan will be

surprised at the quantity of information which may, through its

means, be acquired, even by a short examination. Each manufacture

requires its own list of questions, which will be better drawn up

after the first visit. The following outline, which is very

generally applicable, may suffice for an illustration; and to

save time, it may be convenient to have it printed; and to bind

up, in the form of a pocket-book, a hundred copies of the

skeleton forms for processes, with about twenty of the general

enquiries.



                    GENERAL ENQUIRIES

Outlines of a description of any of the mechanical arts ought to

contain information on the following points



Brief sketch of its history, particularly the date of its

invention, and of its introduction into England.

    Short reference to the previous states through which the

material employed has passed: the places whence it is procured:

the price of a given quantity.

    [The various processes must now be described successively

according to the plan which will be given in (161); after which

the following information should be given.]

    Are various kinds of the same article made in one

establishment, or at different ones, and are there differences in

the processes?

    To what defects are the goods liable?

    What substitutes or adulterations are used?

    What waste is allowed by the master?

    What tests are there of the goodness of the manufactured

articles?

    The weight of a given quantity, or number, and a comparison

with that of the raw material?

    The wholesale price at the manufactory? (*  s. d.) per (  )

    The usual retail price? (*  s. d.)

    Who provide tools? Master, or men? Who repair tools? Master,

or men?

    What is the expense of the machinery?

    What is the annual wear and tear, and what its duration?

    Is there any particular trade for making it? Where?

    Is it made and repaired at the manufactory?

    In any manufactory visited, state the number ( ) of

processes; and of the persons employed in each process; and the

quantity of manufactured produce.

    What quantity is made annually in Great Britain?

    Is the capital invested in manufactories large or small?

    Mention the principal seats of this manufacture in England;

and if it flourishes abroad, the places where it is established.

    The duty, excise. or bounty, if any, should be stated, and

any alterations in past years; and also the amount exported or

imported for a series of years.

    Whether the same article, but of superior, equal, or inferior

make, is imported?

    Does the manufacturer export, or sell, to a middleman, who

supplies the merchant?

    To what countries is it chiefly sent? and in what goods are

the returns made?



    161. Each process requires a separate skeleton, and the

following outline will be sufficient for many different

manufactories:



    Process ( ) Manufacture ( )

    Place ( ) Name ( )

         date    183



    The mode of executing it, with sketches of the tools or

machine if necessary.

    The number of persons necessary to attend the machine. Are

the operatives men. ( ) women, ( ) or children? ( ) If mixed,

what are the proportions?

    What is the pay of each? (s. d.) (s. d. ) (s. d.) per ( )

    What number ( ) of hours do they work per day?

    Is it usual, or necessary, to work night and day without

stopping? Is the labour performed by piece- or by day-work?

    Who provide tools? Master, or men? Who repair tools? Master,

or men? What degree of skill is required, and how many years' ( )

apprenticeship?

    The number of times ( ) the operation is repeated per day or

per hour?

    The number of failures ( ) in a thousand?

    Whether the workmen or the master loses by the broken or

damaged articles?

    What is done with them?

    If the same process is repeated several times, state the

diminution or increase of measure, and the loss, if any, at each

repetition.



    162. In this skeleton, the answers to the questions are in

some cases printed, as 'Who repair the tools? - Masters, Men'; in

order that the proper answer may be underlined with a pencil. In

filling up the answers which require numbers, some care should be

taken: for instance, if the observer stands with his watch in his

hand before a person heading a pin, the workman will almost

certainly increase his speed, and the estimate will be too large.

A much better average will result from enquiring what quantity is

considered a fair day's work. When this cannot be ascertained,

the number of operations performed in a given time may frequently

be counted when the workman is quite unconscious that any person

is observing him. Thus the sound made by the motion of a loom may

enable the observer to count the number of strokes per minute,

even though he is outside the building in which it is contained.

M. Coulomb, who had great experience in making such observations,

cautions those who may repeat his experiments against being

deceived by such circumstances: 'Je prie' (says he) 'ceux qui

voudront les repeter, s'ils n'ont pas le temps de mesurer les

resultats apres plusiers jours d'un travail continu, d'observer

les ouvriers a differentes reprises dans la journee, sans qu'ils

sachent qu'ils sont observes. L'on ne peut trop avertir combien

l'on risque de se tromper en calculant, soit la vitesse, soit le

temps effectif du travail, d'apres une observation de quelques

minutes.' Memoires de l'Institut. vol. II, p. 247. It frequently

happens, that in a series of answers to such questions, there are

some which, although given directly, may also be deduced by a

short calculation from others that are given or known; and

advantage should always be taken of these verifications, in order

to confirm the accuracy of the statements; or, in case they are

discordant, to correct the apparent anomalies. In putting lists

of questions into the hands of a person undertaking to give

information upon any subject, it is in some cases desirable to

have an estimate of the soundness of his judgement. The questions

can frequently be so shaped, that some of them may indirectly

depend on others; and one or two may be inserted whose answers

can be obtained by other methods: nor is this process without its

advantages in enabling us to determine the value of our own

judgement. The habit of forming an estimate of the magnitude of

any object or the frequency of any occurrence, immediately

previous to our applying to it measure or number, tends

materially to fix the attention and to improve the judgement.


