




The Economy of Machinery and Manufactures

by Charles Babbage

1832



Chapter 23



On the Position of Large Factories



    277. It is found in every country, that the situation of

large manufacturing establishments is confined to particular

districts. In the earlier history of a manufacturing community,

before cheap modes of transport have been extensively introduced,

it will almost always be found that manufactories are placed near

those spots in which nature has produced the raw material:

especially in the case of articles of great weight, and in those

the value of which depends more upon the material than upon the

labour expended on it. Most of the metallic ores being

exceedingly heavy, and being mixed up with large quantities of

weighty and useless materials, must be smelted at no great

distance from the spot which affords them: fuel and power are the

requisites for reducing them; and any considerable fall of water

in the vicinity will naturally be resorted to for aid in the

coarser exertions of physical force; for pounding the ore, for

blowing the furnaces, or for hammering and rolling out the iron.

There are indeed peculiar circumstances which will modify this.

Iron, coal, and limestone, commonly occur in the same tracts; but

the union of the fuel in the same locality with the ore does not

exist with respect to other metals. The tracts generally the most

productive of metallic ores are, geologically speaking, different

from those affording coal: thus in Cornwall there are veins of

copper and of tin, but no beds of coal. The copper ore, which

requires a very large quantity of fuel for its reduction, is sent

by sea to the coalfields of Wales, and is smelted at Swansea;

whilst the vessels which convey it, take back coals to work the

steam-engines for draining the mines, and to smelt the tin, which

requires for that purpose a much smaller quantity of fuel than

copper.

    278. Rivers passing through districts rich in coal and

metals, will form the first highroads for the conveyance of

weighty produce to stations in which other conveniences present

themselves for the further application of human skill. Canals

will succeed, or lend their aid to these; and the yet unexhausted

applications of steam and of gas, hold out a hope of attaining

almost the same advantages for countries to which nature seemed

for ever to have denied them. Manufactures, commerce, and

civilization, always follow the line of new and cheap

communications. Twenty years ago, the Mississippi poured the vast

volume of its waters in lavish profusion through thousands of

miles of countries, which scarcely supported a few wandering and

uncivilized tribes of Indians. The power of the stream seemed to

set at defiance the efforts of man to ascend its course; and, as

if to render the task still more hopeless, large trees, torn from

the surrounding forests, were planted like stakes in its bottom,

forming in some places barriers, in others the nucleus of banks;

and accumulating in the same spot, which but for accident would

have been free from both, the difficulties and dangers of shoals

and of rocks. Four months of incessant toil could scarcely convey

a small bark with its worn-out crew two thousand miles up this

stream. The same voyage is now performed in fifteen days by large

vessels impelled by steam, carrying hundreds of passengers

enjoying all the comforts and luxuries of civilized life. Instead

of the hut of the Indian, and the far more unfrequent log house

of the thinly scattered settlers - villages, towns, and cities,

have arisen on its banks; and the same engine which stems the

force of these powerful waters, will probably tear from their

bottom the obstructions which have hitherto impeded and rendered

dangerous their navigation.(1*)

    279. The accumulation of many large manufacturing

establishments in the same district has a tendency to bring

together purchasers or their agents from great distances, and

thus to cause the institution of a public mart or exchange. This

contributes to diffuse information relative to the supply of raw

materials, and the state of demand for their produce, with which

it is necessary manufacturers should be well acquainted. The very

circumstance of collecting periodically, at one place, a large

number both of those who supply the market and of those who

require its produce, tends strongly to check the accidental

fluctuations to which a small market is always subject, as well

as to render the average of the prices much more uniform. 

    280. When capital has been invested in machinery, and in

buildings for its accommodation, and when the inhabitants of the

neighbourhood have acquired a knowledge of the modes of working

at the machines, reasons of considerable weight are required to

cause their removal. Such changes of position do however occur;

and they have been alluded to by the Committee on the Fluctuation

of Manufacturers' Employment, as one of the causes interfering

most materially with an uniform rate of wages: it is therefore of

particular importance to the workmen to be acquainted with the

real causes which have driven manufactures from their ancient

seats. 



 'The migration or change of place of any manufacture has

sometimes arisen from improvements of machinery not applicable to

the spot where such manufacture was carried on, as appears to

have been the case with the woollen manufacture, which has in

great measure migrated from Essex, Suffolk, and other southern

counties, to the northern districts, where coal for the use of

the steam-engine is much cheaper. But this change has, in some

instances, been caused or accelerated by the conduct of the

workmen, in refusing a reasonable reduction of wages, or opposing

the introduction of some kind of improved machinery or process;

so that, during the dispute, another spot has in great measure

supplied their place in the market. Any violence used by the

workmen against the property of their masters, and any

unreasonable combination on their part, is almost sure thus to be

injurious to themselves.'



    281. These removals become of serious consequence when the

factories have been long established, because a population

commensurate with their wants invariably grows up around them.

The combinations in Nottinghamshire, of persons under the name of

Luddites, drove a great number of lace frames from that district,

and caused establishments to be formed in Devonshire. We ought

also to observe, that the effect of driving any establishment

into a new district, where similar works have not previously

existed, is not merely to place it out of the reach of such

combinations; but, after a few years, the example of its success

will most probably induce other capitalists in the new district

to engage in the same manufacture: and thus, although one

establishment only should be driven away, the workmen, through

whose combination its removal is effected, will not merely suffer

by the loss of that portion of demand for their labour which the

factory caused; but the value of that labour will itself be

reduced by the competition of a new field of production.

    282. Another circumstance which has its influence on this

question, is the nature of the machinery. Heavy machinery, such

as stamping-mills, steam-engines, etc., cannot readily be moved,

and must always be taken to pieces for that purpose; but when the

machinery of a factory consists of a multitude of separate

engines, each complete in itself, and all put in motion by one

source of power, such as that of steam, then the removal is much

less inconvenient. Thus, stocking frames, lace machines, and

looms, can be transported to more favourable positions, with but

a small separation of their parts. 

    283. It is of great importance that the more intelligent

amongst the class of workmen should examine into the correctness

of these views; because, without having their attention directed

to them, the whole class may, in some instances, be led by

designing persons to pursue a course, which, although plausible

in appearance, is in reality at variance with their own best

interests. I confess I am not without a hope that this volume may

fall into the hands of workmen, perhaps better qualified than

myself to reason upon a subject which requires only plain common

sense, and whose powers are sharpened by its importance to their

personal happiness. In asking their attention to the preceding

remarks, and to those which I shall offer respecting

combinations, I can claim only one advantage over them; namely,

that I never have had, and in all human probability never shall

have, the slightest pecuniary interest, to influence even

remotely, or by anticipation, the judgements I have formed on the

facts which have come before me.



NOTES:



1. The amount of obstructions arising from the casual fixing of

trees in the bottom of the river, may be estimated from the

proportion of steamboats destroyed by running upon them. The

subjoined statement is taken from the American Almanack for 1832.

    Between the years 1811 and 1831, three hundred and

forty-eight steamboats were built on the Mississippi and its

tributary streams. During that period a hundred and fifty were

lost or worn out.

    Of this hundred and fifty: worn out         63

                               lost by snags    36

                               burnt            14

                               lost by collision 3

                               by accidents not ascertained 34

Thirty six or nearly one fourth, being destroyed by accidental

obstruction.

    Snag is the name given in America to trees which stand nearly

upright in the stream with their roots fixed at the bottom.

    It is usual to divide off at the bow of the steamboats a

watertight chamber, in order that when a hole is made in it by

running against the snags, the water may not enterthe rest of the

vessel and sink it intantly.





Chapter 24



On Over Manufacturing





    284. One of the natural and almost inevitable consequences of

competition is the production of a supply much larger than the

demand requires. This result usually arises periodically; and it

is equally important, both to the masters and to the workmen, to

prevent its occurrence, or to foresee its arrival. In situations

where a great number of very small capitalists exist - where each

master works himself and is assisted by his own family, or by a

few journeymen - and where a variety of different articles is

produced, a curious system of compensation has arisen which in

some measure diminishes the extent to which fluctuations of wages

would otherwise reach. This is accomplished by a species of

middlemen or factors, persons possessing some capital, who,

whenever the price of any of the articles in which they deal is

greatly reduced, purchase it on their own account, in the hopes

of selling at a profit when the market is better. These persons,

in ordinary times, act as salesmen or agents, and make up

assortments of goods at the market price, for the use of the home

or foreign dealer. They possess large warehouses in which to make

up their orders, or keep in store articles purchased during

periods of depression; thus acting as a kind of flywheel in

equalizing the market price. 285. The effect of

over-manufacturing upon great establishments is different. When

an over supply has reduced prices, one of two events usually

occurs: the first is a diminished payment for labour; the other

is a diminution of the number of hours during which the labourers

work, together with a diminished rate of wages. In the former

case production continues to go on at its ordinary rate: in the

latter, the production itself being checked, the supply again

adjusts itself to the demand as soon as the stock on hand is

worked off, and prices then regain their former level. The latter

course appears, in the first instance, to be the best both for

masters and men; but there seems to be a difficulty in

accomplishing this, except where the trade is in few hands. In

fact, it is almost necessary, for its success, that there should

be a combination amongst the masters or amongst the men; or, what

is always far preferable to either, a mutual agreement for their

joint interests. Combination amongst the men is difficult, and is

always attended with the evils which arise from the ill-will

excited against any persons who, in the perfectly justifiable

exercise of their judgement, are disposed not to act with the

majority. The combination of the masters, on the other hand, is

unavailing, unless the whole body of them agree.. for if any one

master can procure more labour for his money than the rest, he

will be able to undersell them. 

    286. If we look only at the interests of the consumer, the

case is different. When too large a supply has produced a great

reduction of price, it opens the consumption of the article to a

new class, and increases the consumption of those who previously

employed it: it is therefore against the interest of both these

parties that a return to the former price should occur. It is

also certain, that by the diminution of profit which the

manufacturer suffers from the diminished price, his ingenuity

will be additionally stimulated; that he will apply himself to

discover other and cheaper sources for the supply of his raw

material; that he will endeavour to contrive improved machinery

which shall manufacture it at a cheaper rate; or try to introduce

new arrangements into his factory, which shall render the economy

of it more perfect. In the event of his success, by any of these

courses or by their joint effects, a real and substantial good

will be produced. A larger portion of the public will receive

advantage from the use of the article, and they will procure it

at a lower price; and the manufacturer, though his profit on each

operation is reduced, will yet, by the more frequent returns on

the larger produce of his factory, find his real gain at the end

of the year, nearly the same as it was before; whilst the wages

of the workman will return to their level, and both the

manufacturer and the workman will find the demand less

fluctuating, from its being dependent on a larger number of

customers. 

    287. It would be highly interesting, if we could trace, even

approximately, through the history of any great manufacture, the

effects of gluts in producing improvements in machinery, or in

methods of working; and if we could show what addition to the

annual quantity of goods previously manufactured, was produced by

each alteration. It would probably be found, that the increased

quantity manufactured by the same capital, when worked with the

new improvement, would produce nearly the same rate of profit as

other modes of investment. 

    Perhaps the manufacture of iron(1*) would furnish the best

illustration of this subject; because, by having the actual price

of pig and bar iron at the same place and at the same time, the

effect of a change in the value of currency, as well as several

other sources of irregularity, would be removed. 

    288. At the present moment, whilst the manufacturers of iron

are complaining of the ruinously low price of their produce, a

new mode of smelting iron is coming into use, which, if it

realizes the statement of the patentees, promises to reduce

greatly the cost of production. 



The improvement consists in heating the air previously to

employing it for blowing the furnace. One of the results is. that

coal may be used instead of coke; and this, in its turn,

diminishes the quantity of limestone which is required for the

fusion of the iron stone. 



The following statement by the proprietors of the patent is

extracted from Brewster's Journal, 1832, p. 349: 



 Comparative view of the quantity of materials required at the

Clyde iron works to smelt a ton of foundry pig-iron, and of the

quantity of foundry pig-iron smelted from each furnace weekly 



 Fuel in tons of 20 cwt each cwt 112 lbs; Iron-stone; Lime-stone

Cwt; Weekly produce in pig-iron Tons



1. With air not heated and coke; 7;3 1/4; 15; 45

2. With air heated and coke; 4 3/4; 3 1/4; 10; 60

3. With air heated and coals not coked; 2 1/4; 3 1/4; 7 1/2; 65



Notes. 1. To the coals stated in the second and third lines, must

be added 5 cwt of small coals. required to heat the air. 

    2. The expense of the apparatus for applying the heated air

will be from *200 to *300 per furnace. 

    3. No coals are now coked at the Clyde iron works; at all the

three furnaces the iron is smelted with coals. 

    4. The three furnaces are blown by a double-powered

steam-engine, with a steam cylinder 40 inches in diameter, and a

blowing cylinder 80 inches in diameter, which compresses the air

so as to carry 2 1/2 lbs per square inch. There are two tuyeres

to each furnace. The muzzles of the blowpipes are 3 inches in

diameter. 

    5. The air heated to upwards of 600 degrees  of Fahrenheit.

It will melt lead at the distance of three inches from the

orifice through which it issues from the pipe. 



    289. The increased effect produced by thus heating the air is

by no means an obvious result; and an analysis of its action will

lead to some curious views respecting the future application of

machinery for blowing furnaces. 

    Every cubic foot of atmospheric air, driven into a furnace,

consists of two gases.(2*) about one-fifth being oxygen, and

four-fifths azote. 

    According to the present state of chemical knowledge, the

oxygen alone is effective in producing heat; and the operation of

blowing a furnace may be thus analysed. 

    1. The air is forced into the furnace in a condensed state,

and, immediately expanding, abstracts heat from the surrounding

bodies. 

    2. Being itself of moderate temperature. it would, even

without expansion, still require heat to raise it to the

temperature of the hot substances to which it is to be applied. 

    3. On coming into contact with the ignited substances in the

furnace, the oxygen unites with them, parting at the same moment

with a large portion of its latent heat, and forming compounds

which have less specific heat than their separate constituents.

Some of these pass up the chimney in a gaseous state, whilst

others remain in the form of melted slags, floating on the

surface of the iron, which is fused by the heat thus set at

liberty.

    4. The effects of the azote are precisely similar to the

first and second of those above described; it seems to form no

combinations, and contributes nothing, in any stage, to augment

the heat. 

    The plan, therefore, of heating the air before driving it

into the furnace saves, obviously, the whole of that heat which

the fuel must have supplied in raising. it from the temperature

of the external air up to that of 600 degrees  Fahrenheit; thus

rendering the fire more intense, and the glassy slags more

fusible, and perhaps also more effectually decomposing the iron

ore. The same quantity of fuel, applied at once to the furnace,

would only prolong the duration of its heat, not augment its

intensity. 

    290. The circumstance of so large a portion of the air(3*)

driven into furnaces being not merely useless, but acting really

as a cooling, instead of a heating, cause, added to so great a

waste of mechanical power in condensing it, amounting, in fact,

to four-fifths of the whole, clearly shows the defects of the

present method, and the want of some better mode of exciting

combustion on a large scale. The following suggestions are thrown

out as likely to lead to valuable results, even though they

should prove ineffectual for their professed object. 

    291. The great difficulty appears to be to separate the

oxygen, which aids combustion, from the azote which impedes it.

If either of those gases becomes liquid at a lower pressure than

the other, and if those pressures are within the limits of our

present powers of compression, the object might be accomplished. 

    Let us assume, for example, that oxygen becomes liquid under

a pressure of 200 atmospheres, whilst azote requires a pressure

of 250. Then if atmospheric air be condensed to the two hundredth

part of its bulk, the oxygen will be found in a liquid state at

the bottom of the vessel in which the condensation is effected,

and the upper part of the vessel will contain only azote in the

state of gas. The oxygen, now liquefied, may be drawn off for the

supply of the furnace; but as it ought when used, to have a very

moderate degree of condensation, its expansive force may be

previously employed in working a small engine. The compressed

azote also in the upper part of the vessel, though useless for

combustion, may be employed as a source of power, and, by its

expansion, work another engine. By these means the mechanical

force exerted in the original compression would all be restored,

except that small part retained for forcing the pure oxygen into

the furnace, and the much larger part lost in the friction of the

apparatus. 

    292. The principal difficulty to be apprehended in these

operations is that of packing a working piston. so as to bear the

pressure of 200 or 300 atmospheres: but this does not seem

insurmountable. It is possible also that the chemical combination

of the two gases which constitute common air may be effected by

such pressures: if this should be the case, it might offer a new

mode of manufacturing nitrous or nitric acids. The result of such

experiments might take another direction: if the condensation

were performed over liquids, it is possible that they might enter

into new chemical combinations. Thus, if air were highly

condensed in a vessel containing water, the latter might unite

with an additional dose of oxygen, (4*) which. might afterwards

be easily disengaged for the use of the furnace.

    293. A further cause of the uncertainty of the results of

such an experiment arises from the possibility that azote may

really contribute to the fusion of the mixed mass in the furnace,

though its mode of operating is at present unknown. An

examination of the nature of the gases issuing from the chimneys

of iron-foundries, might perhaps assist in clearing up this

point; and, in fact, if such enquiries were also instituted upon

the various products of all furnaces, we might expect the

elucidation of many points in the economy of the metallurgic art.



    294. It is very possible also, that the action of oxygen in a

liquid state might be exceedingly corrosive, and that the

containing vessels must be lined with platinum or some other

substance of very difficult oxydation; and most probably new and

unexpected compounds would be formed at such pressures. In some

experiments made by Count Rumford in 1797, on the force of fired

gunpowder, he noticed a solid compound, which always appeared in

the gunbarrel when the ignited powder had no means of escaping;

and, in those cases, the gas which escaped on removing the

restraining pressure was usually inconsiderable. 

    295. If the liquefied gases are used, the form of the iron

furnace must probably be changed, and perhaps it may be necessary

to direct the flame from the ignited fuel upon the ore to be

fused, instead of mixing that ore with the fuel itself: by a

proper regulation of the blast, an oxygenating or a deoxygenating

flame might be procured; and from the intensity of the flame,

combined with its chemical agency, we might expect the most

refractory ore to be smelted, and that ultimately the metals at

present almost infusible, such as platinum, titanium, and others,

might be brought into common use, and thus effect a revolution in

the arts. 

    296. Supposing, on the occurrence of a glut, that new and

cheaper modes of producing are not discovered, and that the

production continues to exceed the demand, then it is apparent

that too much capital is employed in the trade; and after a time,

the diminished rate of profit will drive some of the

manufacturers to other occupations. What particular individuals

will leave it must depend on a variety of circumstances. Superior

industry and attention will enable some factories to make a

profit rather beyond the rest; superior capital in others will

enable them, without these advantages, to support competition

longer, even at a loss, with the hope of driving the smaller

capitalists out of the market, and then reimbursing themselves by

an advanced price. It is, however, better for all parties, that

this contest should not last long; and it is important, that no

artificial restraint should interfere to prevent it. An instance

of such restriction, and of its injurious effect, occurs at the

port of Newcastle, where a particular Act of Parliament requires

that every ship shall be loaded in its turn. The Committee of the

House of Commons, in their Report on the Coal Trade, state that, 



 'Under the regulations contained in this Act, if more ships

enter into the trade than can be profitablv employed in it, the

loss produced by detention in port, and waiting for a cargo.

which must consequently take place, instead of falling, as it

naturally would, upon particular ships, and forcing them from the

trade, is now divided evenly amongst them; and the loss thus

created is shared by the whole number.' Report, p. 6. 



 297. It is not pretended, in this short view, to trace out all

the effects or remedies of over-manufacturing; the subject is

difficult, and, unlike some of the questions already treated,

requires a combined view of the relative influence of many

concurring causes. 



NOTES:



1. The average price per ton of pig iron, bar iron, and coal,

together with the price paid for labour at the works, for a long

series of years, would be very valuable, and I shall feel much

indebted to anyone who will favour me with it for any, even

short, period.



2. The accurate proportions are, by measure, oxygen 21, azote 79.



3. A similar reasoning may be applied to lamps. An Argand burner,

whether used for consuming oil or gas, admits almost an unlimited

quantity of air. It would deserve enquiry, whether a smaller

quantity might not produce greater light; and, possibly, a

different supply furnish more heat with the same expenditure of

fuel.



4. Deutoxide of hydrogen, the oxygenated water of Thenard.



Chapter 25



Enquiries Previous to Commencing any Manufactory



    298. There are many enquiries which ought always to be made

previous to the commencement of the manufacture of any new

article. These chiefly relate to the expense of tools, machinery,

raw materials, and all the outgoings necessary for its

production; to the extent of demand which is likely to arise; to

the time in which the circulating capital will be replaced; and

to the quickness or slowness with which the new article will

supersede those already in use. 

    299. The expense of tools and of new machines will be more

difficult to ascertain, in proportion as they differ from those

already employed; but the variety in constant use in our various

manufactories, is such, that few inventions now occur in which

considerable resemblance may not be traced to others already

constructed. The cost of the raw material is usually less

difficult to determine; but cases occasionally arise in which it

becomes important to examine whether the supply, at the given

price, can be depended upon: for, in the case of a small

consumption, the additional demand arising from a factory may

produce a considerable temporary rise, though it may ultimately

reduce the price.

    300. The quantity of any new article likely to be consumed is

a most important subject for the consideration of the projector

of a new manufacture. As these pages are not intended for the

instruction of the manufacturer, but rather for the purpose of

giving a general view of the subject, an illustration of the way

in which such questions are regarded by practical men, will,

perhaps, be most instructive. The following extract from the

evidence given before a Committee of the House of Commons, in the

Report on Artizans and Machinery, shows the extent to which

articles apparently the most insignificant, are consumed, and the

view which the manufacturer takes of them. 

    The person examined on this occasion was Mr Ostler, a

manufacturer of glass beads and other toys of the same substance,

from Birmingham. Several of the articles made by him were placed

upon the table, for the inspection of the Committee of the House

of Commons, which held its meetings in one of the

committee-rooms. 



Question. Is there any thing else you have to state upon this

subject?

 Answer. Gentlemen may consider the articles on the table as

extremely insignificant: but perhaps I may surprise them a

little, by mentioning the following fact. Eighteen years ago, on

my first journey to London, a respectable-looking man, in the

city, asked me if I could supply him with dolls' eyes; and I was

foolish enough to feel half offended; I thought it derogatory to

my new dignity as a manufacturer, to make dolls' eyes. He took me

into a room quite as wide, and perhaps twice the length of this,

and we had just room to walk between stacks, from the loor to the

ceiling, of parts of dolls. He said, 'These are only the legs and

arms; the trunks are below., But I saw enough to convince me,

that he wanted a great many eyes; and, as the article appeared

quite in my own line of business, I said I would take an order by

way of experiment; and he showed me several specimens. I copied

the order. He ordered various quantities, and of various sizes

and qualities. On returning to the Tavistock Hotel, I found that

the order amounted to upwards of *500. I went into the country,

and endeavoured to make them. I had some of the most ingenious

glass toymakers in the kingdom in my service; but when I showed

it to them, they shook their heads, and said they had often seen

the article before, but could not make it. I engaged them by

presents to use their best exertions; but after trying and

wasting a great deal of time for three or four weeks, I was

obliged to relinquish the attempt. Soon afterwards I engaged in

another branch of business (chandelier furniture), and took no

more notice of it. About eighteen months ago I resumed the

trinket trade, and then determined to think of the dolls' eyes;

and about eight months since, I accidentally met with a poor

fellow who had impoverished himself by drinking, and who was

dying in a consumption, in a state of great want. I showed him

ten sovereigns: and he said he would instruct me in the process.

He was in such a state that he could not bear the effluvia of his

own lamp. but though I was very conversant with the manual part

of the business, and it related to things I was daily in the

habit of seeing, I felt I could do nothing from his description.

(I mention this to show how difficult it is to convey, by

description, the mode of working.) He took me into his garret,

where the poor fellow had economized to such a degree, that he

actually used the entrails and fat of poultry from Leadenhall

market to save oil (the price of the article having been lately

so much reduced bv competition at home). In an instant. before I

had seen him make three, I felt competent to make a gross; and

the difference between his mode and that of my own workmen was so

trifling, that I felt the utmost astonishment. 



Question. You can now make dolls' eyes?

 Answer. I can. As it was eighteen years ago that I received the

order I have mentioned, and feeling doubtful of my own

recollection, though very strong, and suspecting that it could

[not] have been to the amount stated, I last night took the

present very reduced price of that article (less than half now of

what it was then), and calculating that every child in this

country not using a doll till two years old, and throwing it

aside at seven, and having a new one annually, I satisfied myself

that the eyes alone would produce a circulation of a great many

thousand pounds. I mention this merely to show the importance of

trifles; and to assign one reason, amongst many, for my

conviction. that nothing but personal communication can enable

our manufactures to be transplanted. 



    301. In many instances it is exceedingly difficult to

estimate beforehand the sale of an article, or the effects of a

machine; a case, however, occurred during a recent enquiry, which

although not quite appropriate as an illustration of probable

demand, is highly instructive as to the mode of conducting

investigations of this nature. A committee of the House of

Commons was appointed to enquire into the tolls proper to be

placed on steam-carriages; a question, apparently, of difficult

solution, and upon which widely different opinions had been

formed, if we may judge by the very different rate of tolls

imposed upon such carriages by different 'turnpike trusts'. The

principles on which the committee conducted the enquiry were,

that 'The only ground on which a fair claim to toll can be made

on any public road, is to raise a fund, which, with the strictest

economy, shall be just sufficient - first, to repay the expense

of its original formation; secondly, to maintain it in good and

sufficient repair.' They first endeavoured to ascertain, from

competent persons, the effect of the atmosphere alone in

deteriorating a well-constructed road. The next step was, to

determine the proportion in which the road was injured, by the

effect of the horses' feet compared with that of the wheels. Mr

Macneill, the superintendent, under Mr Telford, of the Holyhead

roads, was examined, and proposed to estimate the relative

injury, from the comparative quantities of iron worn off from the

shoes of the horses, and from the tire of the wheels. From the

data he possessed, respecting the consumption of iron for the

tire of the wheels, and for the shoes of the horses, of one of

the Birmingham day-coaches, he estimated the wear and tear of

roads, arising from the feet of the horses, to be three times as

great as that arising from the wheels. Supposing repairs

amounting to a hundred pounds to be required on a road travelled

over by a fast coach at the rate of ten miles an hour, and the

same amount of injury to occur on another road, used only by

waggons, moving at the rate of three miles an hour, Mr Macneill

divides the injuries in the following proportions: 



 Injuries arising from;  Fast coach; Heavy waggon

 Atmospheric changes         20         20

 Wheels                      20         35.5

 Horses' feet drawing        60         44.5

 Total injury               100        100 



    Supposing it, therefore, to be ascertained that the wheels of

steam carriages do no more injury to roads than other carriages

of equal weight travelling with the same velocity, the committee

now possessed the means of approximating to a just rate of toll

for steam carriages.(1*)

    302. As connected with this subject, and as affording most

valuable information upon points in which, previous to

experiment, widely different opinions have been entertained; the

following extract is inserted from Mr Telford's Report on the

State of the Holyhead and Liverpool Roads. The instrument

employed for the comparison was invented by Mr Macneill; and the

road between London and Shrewsbury was selected for the place of

experiment. 

    The general results, when a waggon weighing 21 cwt was used

on different sorts of roads, are as follows: 



                                        lbs

 1. On well-made pavement, the draught is 33

 2. On a broken stone surface, or old flint road 65

 3. On a gravel road 147

 4. On a broken stone road, upon a rough pavement foundation 46

 5. On a broken stone surface, upon a bottoming of concrete,

formed of Parker's cement and gravel 46 



The following statement relates to the force required to draw a

coach weighing 18 cwt. exclusive of seven passengers, up roads of

various inclinations: 





  Inclination; Force required at six miles per hour; Force at

eight miles per hour; Force at ten miles per hour

 

            lbs     lbs     lbs

 1 in  20   268     296     318

 1 in  26   213     219     225

 1 in  30   165     196     200

 1 in  40   160     166     172

 1 in 600   111     120     128 



    303. In establishing a new manufactory, the time in which the

goods produced can be brought to market and the returns be

realized, should be thoroughly considered, as well as the time

the new article will take to supersede those already in use. If

it is destroyed in using, the new produce will be much more

easily introduced. Steel pens readily took the place of quills;

and a new form of pen would, if it possessed any advantage, as

easily supersede the present one. A new lock, however secure, and

however cheap, would not so readily make its way. If less

expensive than the old, it would be employed in new work: but old

locks would rarely be removed to make way for it; and even if

perfectly secure, its advance would be slow.

    304. Another element in this question which should not be

altogether omitted, is the opposition which the new manufacture

may create by its real or apparent injury to other interests, and

the probable effect of that opposition. This is not always

foreseen; and when anticipated is often inaccurately estimated.

On the first establishment of steamboats from London to Margate,

the proprietors of the coaches running on that line of road

petitioned the House of Commons against them, as likely to lead

to the ruin of the coach proprietors. It was, however, found that

the fear was imaginary; and in a very few years, the number of

coaches on that road was considerably increased, apparently

through the very means which were thought to be adverse to it.

The fear, which is now entertained, that steampower and railroads

may drive out of employment a large proportion of the horses at

present in use, is probably not less unfounded. On some

particular lines such an effect might be produced; but in all

probability the number of horses employed in conveying goods and

passengers to the great lines of railroad, would exceed that

which is at present used.



NOTES:



1. One of the results of these enquiries is, that every coach

which travels from London to Birmingham distributes about eleven

pounds of wrought iron, along with the line of road between the

two places.



Chapter 26



On a New System of Manufacturing



    305. A most erroneous and unfortunate opinion prevails

amongst workmen in many manufacturing countries, that their own

interest and that of their employers are at variance. The

consequences are that valuable machinery is sometimes neglected,

and even privately injured - that new improvements, introduced by

the masters, do not receive a fair trial - and that the talents

and observations of the workmen are not directed to the

improvement of the processes in which they are employed. This

error is, perhaps, most prevalent where the establishment of

manufactories has been of recent origin, and where the number of

persons employed in them is not very large: thus, in some of the

Prussian provinces on the Rhine it prevails to a much greater

extent than in Lancashire. Perhaps its diminished prevalence in

our own manufacturing districts, arises partly from the superior

information spread amongst the workmen; and partly from the

frequent example of persons, who by good conduct and an attention

to the interests of their employers for a series of years, have

become foremen, or who have ultimately been admitted into

advantageous partnerships. Convinced as I am, from my own

observation, that the prosperity and success of the master

manufacturer is essential to the welfare of the workman, I am yet

compelled to admit that this connection is, in many cases, too

remote to be always understood by the latter. and whilst it is

perfectly true that workmen, as a class, derive advantage from

the prosperity of their employers, I do not think that each

individual partakes of that advantage exactly in proportion to

the extent to which he contributes towards it; nor do I perceive

that the resulting advantage is as immediate as it might become

under a different system. 

    306. It would be of great importance, if, in every large

establishment the mode of payment could be so arranged, that

every person employed should derive advantage from the success of

the whole; and that the profits of each individual should

advance, as the factory itself produced profit, without the

necessity of making any change in the wages. This is by no means

easy to effect, particularly amongst that class whose daily

labour procures for them their daily food. The system which has

long been pursued in working the Cornish mines, although not

exactly fulfilling these conditions, yet possesses advantages

which make it worthy of attention, as having nearly approached

towards them, and as tending to render fully effective the

faculties of all who are engaged in it. I am the more strongly

induced to place before the reader a short sketch of this system,

because its similarity to that which I shall afterwards recommend

for trial, will perhaps remove some objections to the latter, and

may also furnish some valuable hints for conducting any

experiment which might be undertaken.

    307. In the mines of Cornwall, almost the whole of the

operations, both above and below ground, are contracted for. The

manner of making the contract is nearly as follows. At the end of

every two months, the work which it is proposed to carry on

during the next period is marked out. It is of three kinds. 1.

Tutwork, which consists in sinking shafts, driving levels, and

making excavations: this is paid for by the fathom in depth, or

in length, or by the cubic fathom. 2. Tribute, which is payment

for raising and dressing the ore, by means of a certain part of

its v alue when rendered merchantable. It is this mode of payment

which produces such admirable effects. The miners, who are to be

paid in proportion to the richness of the vein, and the quantity

of metal extracted from it, naturally become quicksighted in the

discovery of ore, and in estimating its value; and it is their

interest to avail themselves of every improvement that can bring

it more cheaply to market. 3. Dressing. The 'Tributors', who dig

and dress the ore, can seldom afford to dress the coarser parts

of what they raise, at their contract price; this portion,

therefore, is again let out to other persons, who agree to dress

it at an advanced price. 

    The lots of ore to be dressed, and the works to be carried

on, having been marked out some days before, and having been

examined by the men, a kind of auction is held by the captains of

the mine, in which each lot is put up, and bid for by different

gangs of men. The work is then offered, at a price usually below

that bid at the auction, to the lowest bidder, who rarely

declines it at the rate proposed. The tribute is a certain sum

out of every twenty shillings' worth of ore, raised. and may vary

from threepence to fourteen or fifteen shillings. The rate of

earnings in tribute is very uncertain: if a vein, which was poor

when taken, becomes rich, the men earn money rapidly; and

instances have occurred in which each miner of a gang has gained

a hundred pounds in the two months. These extraordinary cases,

are, perhaps, of more advantage to the owners of the mine than

even to the men; for whilst the skill and industry of the workmen

are greatly stimulated, the owner himself always derives still

greater advantage from the improvement of the vein.(1*) This

system has been introduced, by Mr Taylor, into the lead mines of

Flintshire, into those at Skipton in Yorkshire, and into some of

the copper mines of Cumberland; and it is desirable that it

should become general, because no other mode of payment affords

to the workmen a measure of success so directly proportioned to

the industry, the integrity, and the talent, which they exert. 

    308. I shall now present the outline of a system which

appears to me to be pregnant with the most important results,

both to the class of workmen and to the country at large; and

which, if acted upon, would, in my opinion, permanently raise the

working classes, and greatly extend the manufacturing system. 

    The general principles on which the proposed system is

founded, are

    1. That a considerable part of the wages received by each

person employed should depend on the profits made by the

establishment; and,

    2. That every person connected with it should derive more

advantage from applying any improvement he might discover, to the

factory in which he is employed, than he could by any other

course. 

    309. It would be difficult to prevail on the large capitalist

to enter upon any system, which would change the division of the

profits arising from the employment of his capital in setting

skill and labour in action; any alteration, therefore, must be

expected rather from the small capitalist, or from the higher

class of workmen, who combine the two characters; and to these

latter classes, whose welfare will be first affected, the change

is most important. I shall therefore first point out the course

to be pursued in making the experiment; and then, taking a

particular branch of trade as an illustration, I shall examine

the merits and defects of the proposed system as applied to it. 

    310. Let us suppose, in some large manufacturing town, ten or

twelve of the most intelligent and skilful workmen to unite,

whose characters for sobriety and steadiness are good, and are

well known among their own class. Such persons will each possess

some small portion of capital; and let them join with one or two

others who have raised themselves into the class of small master

manufacturers, and, therefore possess rather a larger portion of

capital. Let these persons, after well considering the subject,

agree to establish a manufactory of fire-irons and fenders; and

let us suppose that each of the ten workmen can command forty

pounds, and each of the small capitalists possesses two hundred

pounds: thus they have a capital of *800 with which to commence

business; and, for the sake of simplifying, let us further

suppose the labour of each of these twelve persons to be worth

two pounds a week. One portion of their capital will be expended

in procuring the tools necessary for their trade, which we shall

take at *400, and this must be considered as their fixed capital.

The remaining *400 must be employed as circulating capital, in

purchasing the iron with which their articles are made, in paying

the rent of their workshops, and in supporting themselves and

their families until some portion of it is replaced by the sale

of the goods produced. 

    311. Now the first question to be settled is, what proportion

of the profit should be allowed for the use of capital, and what

for skill and labour? It does not seem possible to decide this

question by any abstract reasoning: if the capital supplied by

each partner is equal, all difficulty will be removed; if

otherwise, the proportion must be left to find its level, and

will be discovered by experience; and it is probable that it will

not fluctuate much. Let us suppose it to be agreed that the

capital of *800 shall receive the wages of one workman. At the

end of each week every workman is to receive one pound as wages,

and one pound is to be divided amongst the owners of the capital.

After a few weeks the returns will begin to come in; and they

will soon become nearly uniform. Accurate accounts should be kept

of every expense and of all the sales; and at the end of each

week the profit should be divided. A certain portion should be

laid aside as a reserved fund, another portion for repair of the

tools, and the remainder being divided into thirteen parts, one

of these parts would be divided amongst the capitalists and one

belong to each workman. Thus each man would, in ordinary

circumstances, make up his usual wages of two pounds weekly. If

the factory went on prosperously, the wages of the men would

increase; if the sales fell off they would be diminished. It is

important that every person employed in the establishment,

whatever might be the amount paid for his services, whether he

act as labourer or porter, as the clerk who keeps the accounts,

or as bookkeeper employed for a few hours once a week to

superintend them, should receive one half of what his service is

worth in fixed salary, the other part varying with the success of

the undertaking. 

    312. In such a factory, of course, division of labour would

be introduced: some of the workmen would be constantly employed

in forging the fire-irons, others in polishing them, others in

piercing and forming the fenders. It would be essential that the

time occupied in each process, and also its expense, should be

well ascertained; information which would soon be obtained very

precisely. Now, if a workman should find a mode of shortening any

of the processes, he would confer a benefit on the whole party,

even if they received but a small part of the resulting profit.

For the promotion of such discoveries, it would be desirable that

those who make them should either receive some reward, to be

determined after a sufficient trial by a committee assembling

periodically; or if they be of high importance, that the

discoverer should receive one-half, or twothirds, of the profit

resulting from them during the next year, or some other

determinate period, as might be found expedient. As the

advantages of such improvements would be clear gain to the

factory, it is obvious that such a share might be allowed to the

inventor, that it would be for his interest rather to give the

benefit of them to his partners, than to dispose of them in any

other way. 

    313. The result of such arrangements in a factory would be,

    1. That every person engaged in it would have a direct

interest in its prosperity; since the effect of any success, or

falling off, would almost immediately produce a corresponding

change in his own weekly receipts. 

    2. Every person concerned in the factory would have an

immediate interest in preventing any waste or mismanagement in

all the departments. 

    3. The talents of all connected with it would be strongly

directed to its improvement in every department. 

    4. None but workmen of high character and qualifications

could obtain admission into such establishments; because when any

additional hands were required, it would be the common interest

of all to admit only the most respectable and skilful; and it

would be far less easy to impose upon a dozen workmen than upon

the single proprietor of a factory. 

    5. When any circumstance produced a glut in the market, more

skill would be directed to diminishing the cost of production;

and a portion of the time of the men might then be occupied in

repairing and improving their tools, for which a reserved fund

would pay, thus checking present, and at the same time

facilitating future production.

    6. Another advantage, of no small importance, would be the

total removal of all real or imaginary causes for combinations.

The workmen and the capitalist would so shade into each other -

would so evidently have a common interest, and their difficulties

and distresses would be mutually so well understood that, instead

of combining to oppress one another, the only combination which

could exist would be a most powerful union between both parties

to overcome their common difficulties. 



    314. One of the difficulties attending such a system is, that

capitalists would at first fear to embark in it, imagining that

the workmen would receive too large a share of the profits: and

it is quite true that the workmen would have a larger share than

at present: but, at the same time, it is presumed the effect of

the whole system would be, that the total profits of the

establishment being much increased, the smaller proportion

allowed to capital under this system would yet be greater in

actual amount, than that which results to it from the larger

share in the system now existing. 

    315. It is possible that the present laws relating to

partnerships might interfere with factories so conducted. If this

interference could not be obviated by confining their purchases

under the proposed system to ready money, it would be desirable

to consider what changes in the law would be necessary to its

existence: and this furnishes another reason for entering into

the question of limited partnerships. 

    316. A difficulty would occur also in discharging workmen who

behaved ill, or who were not competent to their work; this would

arise from their having a certain interest in the reserved fund,

and, perhaps, from their possessing a certain portion of the

capital employed; but without entering into detail, it may be

observed, that such cases might be determined on by meetings of

the whole establishment; and that if the policy of the laws

favoured such establishments, it would scarcely be more difficult

to enforce just regulations, than it now is to enforce some which

are unjust. by means of combinations either amongst the masters

or the men. 

    317. Some approach to this system is already practised in

several trades: the mode of conducting the Cornish mines has

already been alluded to; the payment to the crew of whaling ships

is governed by this principle; the profits arising from fishing

with nets on the south coast of England are thus divided:

one-half the produce belongs to the owner of the boat and net;

the other half is divided in equal portions between the persons

using it, who are also bound to assist in repairing the net when

injured. 



NOTES:



1. For a detailed account of the method of working the Cornish

mines, see a paper of Mr John Taylor's Transactions of the

Geological Society, vol. ii, p. 309.



Chapter 27



On Contriving Machinery



    318. The power of inventing mechanical contrivances, and of

combining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the

frequency of its occurrence, to be a difficult or a rare gift. Of

the vast multitude of inventions which have been produced almost

daily for a series of years, a large part has failed from the

imperfect nature of the first trials; whilst a still larger

portion, which had escaped the mechanical difficulties, failed

only because the economy of their operations was not sufficiently

attended to. 

    The commissioners appointed to examine into the methods

proposed for preventing the forgery of bank-notes, state in their

report, that out of one hundred and seventy-eight projects

communicated to the bank and to the commissioners, there were

only twelve of superior skill, and nine which it was necessary

more particularly to examine. 

    319. It is however a curious circumstance, that although the

power of combining machinery is so common, yet the more beautiful

combinations are exceedingly rare. Those which command our

admiration equally by the perfection of their effects and the

simplicity of their means, are found only amongst the happiest

productions of genius.

    To produce movements even of a complicated kind is not

difficult. There exist a great multitude of known contrivances

for all the more usual purposes, and if the exertion of moderate

power is the end of the mechanism to be contrived, it is possible

to construct the whole machine upon paper, and to judge of the

proper strength to be given to each part as well as to the

framework which supports it, and also of its ultimate effect,

long before a single part of it has been executed. ln fact, all

the contrivance, and all the improvements, ought first to be

represented in the drawings. 

    320. On the other hand, there are effects dependent upon

physical or chemical properties for the determination of which no

drawings will be of any use. These are the legitimate objects of

direct trial. For example; if the ultimate result of an engine is

to be that it shall impress letters on a copperplate by means of

steel punches forced into it, all the mechanism by which the

punches and the copper are to be moved at stated intervals, and

brought into contact, is within the province of drawing, and the

machinery may be arranged entirely upon paper. But a doubt may

reasonably spring up, whether the bur that will be raised round

the letter, which has been already punched upon the copper, may

not interfere with the proper action of the punch for the letter

which is to be punched next adjacent to it. It may also be feared

that the effect of punching the second letter, if it be

sufficiently near to the first, may distort the form of that

first figure. If neither of these evils should arise, still the

bur produced by the punching might be expected to interfere with

the goodness of the impression produced by the copperplate; and

the plate itself, after having all but its edge covered with

figures, might change its form, from the unequal condensation

which it must suffer in this process, so as to render it very

difficult to take impressions from it at all. It is impossible by

any drawings to solve difficulties such as these, experiment

alone can determine their effect. Such experiments having been

made, it is found that if the sides of the steel punch are nearly

at right angles to the face of the letter, the bur produced is

very inconsiderable; that at the depth which is sufficient for

copperplate printing, no distortion of the adjacent letters takes

place, although those letters are placed very close to each

other; that the small bur which arises may easily be scraped off;

and that the copperplate is not distorted by the condensation of

the metal in punching, but is perfectly fit to print from, after

it has undergone that process. 

    321. The next stage in the progress of an invention, after

the drawings are finished and the preliminary experiments have

been made, if any such should be requisite, is the execution of

the machine itself. It can never be too strongly. impressed upon

the minds of those who are devising new machines, that to make

the most perfect drawings of every part tends essentially both to

the success of the trial, and to economy in arriving at the

result. The actual execution from working drawings is

comparatively an easy task; provided always that good tools are

employed, and that methods of working are adopted, in which the

perfection of the part constructed depends less on the personal

skill of the workman, than upon the certainty of the method

employed. 

    322. The causes of failure in this stage most frequently

derive their origin from errors in the preceding one; and it is

sufficient merely to indicate a few of their sources. They

frequently arise from having neglected to take into consideration

that metals are not perfectly rigid but elastic. A steel cylinder

of small diameter must not be regarded as an inflexible rod; but

in order to ensure its perfect action as an axis, it must be

supported at proper intervals. 

    Again, the strength and stiffness of the framing which

supports the mechanism must be carefully attended to. It should

always be recollected, that the addition of superfluous matter to

the immovable parts of a machine produces no additional momentum,

and therefore is not accompanied with the same evil that arises

when the moving parts are increased in weight. The stiffness of

the framing in a machine produces an important advantage. If the

bearings of the axis (those places at which they are supported)

are once placed in a straight line, they will remain so, if the

framing be immovable; whereas if the framework changes its form,

though ever so slightly, considerable friction is immediately

produced. This effect is so well understood in the districts

where spinning factories are numerous, that, in estimating the

expense of working a new factory, it is allowed that five per

cent on the power of the steam-engine will be saved if the

building is fireproof: for the greater strength and rigidity of a

fireproof building prevents the movement of the long shafts or

axes which drive the machinery, from being impeded by the

friction that would arise from the slightest deviation in any of

the bearings. 

    323. In conducting experiments upon machinery, it is quite a

mistake to suppose that any imperfect mechanical work is good

enough for such a purpose. If the experiment is worth making, it

ought to be tried with all the advantages of which the state of

mechanical art admits; for an imperfect trial may cause an idea

to be given up, which better workmanship might have proved to be

practicable. On the other hand, when once the efficiency of a

contrivance has been established, with good workmanship. it will

be easy afterwards to ascertain the degree of perfection which

will suffice for its due action. 

    324. It is partly owing to the imperfection of the original

trials, and partly to the gradual improvements in the art of

making machinery, that many inventions which have been tried, and

given up in one state of art, have at another period been

eminently successful. The idea of printing by means of moveable

types had probably suggested itself to the imagination of many

persons conversant with impressions taken either from blocks or

seals. We find amongst the instruments discovered in the remains

of Pompeii and Herculaneum, stamps for words formed out of one

piece of metal, and including several letters. The idea of

separating these letters, and of recombining them into other

words, for the purpose of stamping a book, could scarcely have

failed to occur to many: but it would almost certainly have been

rejected by those best acquainted with the mechanical arts of

that time; for the workmen of those days must have instantly

perceived the impossibility of producing many thousand pieces of

wood or metal, fitting so perfectly and ranging so uniformly, as

the types or blocks of wood now used in the art of printing. 

    The principle of the press which bears the name of Bramah,

was known about a century and a half before the machine, to which

it gave rise, existed; but the imperfect state of mechanical art

in the time of the discoverer, would have effectually deterred

him, if the application of it had occurred to his mind, from

attempting to employ it in practice as an instrument for exerting

force. 

    These considerations prove the propriety of repeating, at the

termination of intervals during which the art of making machinery

has received any great improvement, the trails of methods which,

although founded upon just principles, had previously failed. 

    325. When the drawings of a machine have been properly made,

and the parts have been well executed, and even when the work it

produces possesses all the qualities which were anticipated,

still the invention may fail; that is, it may fail of being

brought into general practice. This will most frequently arise

from the circumstance of its producing its work at a greater

expense than that at which it can be made by other methods. 

    326. Whenever the new, or improved machine, is intended to

become the basis of a manufacture, it is essentially requisite

that the whole expense attending its operations should be fully

considered before its construction is undertaken. It is almost

always very difficult to make this estimate of the expense: the

more complicated the mechanism, the less easy is the task; and in

cases of great complexity and extent of machinery it is almost

impossible. It has been estimated roughly, that the first

individual of any newly invented machine, will cost about five

times as much as the construction of the second. an estimate

which is, perhaps, sufficiently near the truth. If the second

machine is to be precisely like the first, the same drawings, and

the same patterns will answer for it; but if, as usually happens,

some improvements have been suggested by the experience of the

first, these must be more or less altered. When, however. two or

three machines have been completed, and many more are wanted,

they can usually be produced at much less than one-fifth of the

expense of the original invention. 

    327. The arts of contriving, of drawing, and of executing, do

not usually reside in their greatest perfection in one

individual; and in this, as in other arts, the division of labour

must be applied. The best advice which can be offered to a

projector of any mechanical invention, is to employ a respectable

draughtsman; who, if he has had a large experience in his

profession, will assist in finding out whether the contrivance is

new, and can then make working drawings of it. The first step,

however, the ascertaining whether the contrivance has the merit

of novelty, is most important; for it is a maxim equally just in

all the arts, and in every science, that the man who aspires to

fortune or to fame by new discoveries, must be content to examine

with care the knowledge of his contemporaries, or to exhaust his

efforts in inventing again, what he will most probably. find has

been better executed before.

    328. This, nevertheless, is a subject upon which even

ingenious men are often singularly negligent. There is, perhaps,

no trade or profession existing in which there is so much

quackery, so much ignorance of the scientific principles, and of

the history of their own art, with respect to its resources and

extent, as are to be met with amongst mechanical projectors. The

self-constituted engineer, dazzled with the beauty of some,

perhaps, really original contrivance, assumes his new profession

with as little suspicion that previous instruction, that thought

and painful labour, are necessary to its successful exercise, as

does the statesman or the senator. Much of this false confidence

arises from the improper estimate which is entertained of the

difficulty of invention in mechanics. It is, therefore, of great

importance to the individuals and to the families of those who

are too often led away from more suitable pursuits, the dupes of

their own ingenuity and of the popular voice, to convince both

them and the public that the power of making new mechanical

combinations is a possession common to a multitude of minds, and

that the talents which it requires are by no means of the highest

order. It is still more important that they should be impressed

with the conviction that the great merit, and the great success

of those who have attained to eminence in such matters, was

almost entirely due to the unremitted perseverance with which

they concentrated upon their successful inventions the skill and

knowledge which years of study had matured. 



Chapter 28



Proper Circumstances for the Application of Machinery



    329. The first object of machinery, the chief cause of its

extensive utility, is the perfection and the cheap production of

the articles which it is intended to make. Whenever it is

required to produce a great multitude of things, all of exactly

the same kind, the proper time has arrived for the construction

of tools or machines by which they may be manufactured. If only a

few pairs of cotton stockings should be required, it would be an

absurd waste of time, and of capital, to construct a

stocking-frame to weave them, when, for a few pence, four steel

wires can be procured by which they may be knit. If, on the other

hand, many thousand pairs were wanted, the time employed, and the

expense incurred in constructing a stocking-frame, would be more

than repaid by the saving of time in making that large number of

stockings. The same principle is applicable to the copying of

letters: if three or four copies only are required, the pen and

the human hand furnish the cheapest means of obtaining them; if

hundreds are called for, lithography may be brought to our

assistance; but if hundreds of thousands are wanted, the

machinery of a printing establishment supplies the most

economical method of accomplishing the object.

    330. There are, however, many cases in which machines or

tools must be made, in which economical production is not the

most important object. Whenever it is required to produce a few

articles parts of machinery, for instance, which must be executed

with the most rigid accuracy or be perfectly alike - it is nearly

impossible to fulfil this condition, even with the aid of the

most skilful hands: and it becomes necessary to make tools

expressly for the purpose, although those tools should, as

frequently happens, cost more in constructing than the things

they are destined to make. 

    331. Another instance of the just application of machinery,

even at an increased expense, arises where the shortness of time

in which the article is produced, has an important influence on

its value. In the publication of our daily newspapers, it

frequently happens that the debates in the Houses of Parliament

are carried on to three and four o'clock in the morning, that is.

to within a very few hours of the time for the publication of the

paper. The speeches must be taken down by reporters, conveyed by

them to the establishment of the newspaper, perhaps at the

distance of one or two miles. transcribed by them. in the office,

set up by the compositor, the press corrected. and the paper be

printed off and distributed, before the public can read them.

Some of these journals have a circulation of from five to ten

thousand daily. Supposing four thousand to be wanted, and that

they could be printed only at the rate of five hundred per hour

upon one side of the paper, (which was the greatest number two

journeymen and a boy could take off by the old hand presses),

sixteen hours would be required for printing the complete

edition; and the news conveyed to the purchasers of the latest

portion of the impression, would be out of date before they could

receive it. To obviate this difficulty, it was often necessary to

set up the paper in duplicate, and sometimes, when late, in

triplicate: but the improvements in the printing machines have

been so great, that four thousand copies are now printed on one

side in an hour. 

    332. The establishment of 'The Times' newspaper is an

example, on a large scale, of a manufactory in which the division

of labour, both mental and bodily, is admirably illustrated, and

in which also the effect of domestic economy is well exemplified.

It is scarcely imagined by the thousands who read that paper in

various quarters of the globe, what a scene of organized activity

the factory presents during the whole night, or what a quantity

of talent and mechanical skill is put in action for their

amusement and information. (1*) Nearly a hundred persons are

employed in this establishment; and, during the session of

Parliament, at least twelve reporters are constantly attending

the Houses of Commons and Lords; each in his turn retiring, after

about an hour's work, to translate into ordinary writing, the

speech he has just heard and noted in shorthand. In the meantime

fifty compositors are constantly at work, some of whom have

already set up the beginning, whilst others are committing to

type the yet undried manuscript of the continuation of a speech,

whose middle portion is travelling to the office in the pocket of

the hasty reporter, and whose eloquent conclusion is, perhaps, at

that very moment, making the walls of St Stephen's vibrate with

the applause of its hearers. These congregated types, as fast as

they are composed, are passed in portions to other hands; till at

last the scattered fragments of the debate, forming, when united

with the ordinary matter, eight-and-forty columns, reappear in

regular order on the platform of the printing-press. The hand of

man is now too slow for the demands of his curiosity, but the

power of steam comes to his assistance. Ink is rapidly supplied

to the moving types, by the most perfect mechanism; four

attendants incessantly introduce the edges of large sheets of

white paper to the junction of two great rollers, which seem to

devour them with unsated appetite; other rollers convey them to

the type already inked, and having brought them into rapid and

successive contact, redeliver them to four other assistants,

completely printed by the almost momentary touch. Thus, in one

hour, four thousand sheets of paper are printed on one side; and

an impression of twelve thousand copies, from above three hundred

thousand moveable pieces of metal, is produced for the public in

six hours. 

    333. The effect of machinery in printing other periodical

publications, and of due economy in distributing them, is so

important for the interests of knowledge, that it is worth

examining by what means it is possible to produce them at the

small price at which they are sold. 'Chambers' Journal', which is

published at Edinburgh, and sold at three halfpence a number,

will furnish an example. Soon after its commencement in 1832, the

sale in Scotland reached 30,000, and in order to supply the

demand in London it was reprinted; but on account of the expense

of 'composition' it was found that this plan would not produce

any profit, and the London edition was about to be given up, when

it occurred to the proprietor to stereotype it at Edinburgh, and

cast two copies of the plates. This is now done about three weeks

before the day of publication - one set of plates being sent up

to London by the mail, an impression is printed off by steam: the

London agent has then time to send packages by the cheapest

conveyances to several of the large towns, and other copies go

through the booksellers' parcels to all the smaller towns. Thus a

great saving is effected in the outlay of capital, and 20,000

copies are conveyed from London, as a centre, to all parts of

England, whilst there is no difficulty in completing imperfect

sets, nor any waste from printing more than the public demand. 

    334. The conveyance of letters is another case, in which the

importance of saving time would allow of great expense in any new

machinery for its accomplishment. There is a natural limit to the

speed of horses, which even the greatest improvements in the

breed, aided by an increased perfection in our roads, can never

surpass; and from which, perhaps, we are at present not very

remote. When we reflect upon the great expense of time and money

which the last refinements of a theory or an art usually require,

it is not unreasonable to suppose that the period has arrived in

which the substitution of machinery for such purposes ought to be

tried. 

    335. The post bag despatched every evening by the mail to one

of our largest cities, Bristol, usually weighs less than a

hundred pounds. Now, the first reflection which naturally

presents itself is, that, in order to transport these letters a

hundred and twenty miles, a coach and apparatus, weighing above

thirty hundredweight, are put in motion, and also conveyed over

the same space. (2*)

    It is obvious that, amongst the conditions of machinery for

accomplishing such an object, it would be desirable to reduce the

weight of matter to be conveyed along with the letters: it would

also be desirable to reduce the velocity of the animal power

employed; because the faster a horse is driven, the less weight

he can draw. Amongst the variety of contrivances which might be

imagined for this purpose, we will mention one, which, although

by no means free from objections, fulfils some of the prescribed

conditions; and it is not a purely theoretical speculation. since

some few experiments have been made upon it, though on an

extremely limited scale. 

    336. Let us imagine a series of high pillars erected at

frequent intervals, perhaps every hundred feet, and as nearly as

possible in a straight line between two post towns. An iron or

steel wire must be stretched over proper supports, fixed on each

of these pillars, and terminating at the end of every three or

five miles, as may be found expedient, in a very strong support,

by which it may be stretched. At each of these latter points a

man ought to reside in a small stationhouse. A narrow cylindrical

tin case, to contain the letters, might be suspended by two

wheels rolling upon this wire; the cases being so constructed as

to enable the wheels to pass unimpeded by the fixed supports of

the wire. An endless wire of much smaller size must pass over two

drums, one at each end of the station. This wire should be

supported on rollers, fixed to the supports of the great wire,

and at a short distance below it. There would thus be two

branches of the smaller wire always accompanying the larger one;

and the attendant at either station, by turning the drum, might

cause them to move with great velocity in opposite directions. In

order to convey the cylinder which contains the letters, it would

only be necessary to attach it by a string, or by a catch, to

either of the branches of the endless wire. Thus it would be

conveyed speedily to the next station, where it would be removed

by the attendant to the commencement of the next wire, and so

forwarded. It is unnecessary to enter into the details which

this, or any similar plan, would require. The difficulties are

obvious; but if: these could be overcome, it would present many

advantages besides velocity; for if an attendant resided at each

station, the additional expense of having two or three deliveries

of letters every day, and even of sending expresses at any

moment, would be comparatively trifling; nor is it impossible

that the stretched wire might itself be available for a species

of telegraphic communication yet more rapid. 

    Perhaps if the steeples of churches, properly selected, were

made use of, connecting them by a few intermediate stations with

some great central building, as, for instance, with the top of St

Paul's; and if a similar apparatus were placed on the top of each

steeple, with a man to work it during the day, it might be

possible to diminish the expense of the two-penny post. and make

deliveries every half hour over the greater part of the

metropolis. 

    337. The power of steam, however, bids fair almost to rival

the velocity of these contrivances; and the fitness of its

application to the purposes of conveyance, particularly where

great rapidity is required, begins now to be generally admitted.

The following extract from the Report of the Committee of the

House of Commons on steamcarriages, explains clearly its various

advantages: 



Perhaps one of the principal advantages resulting from the use of

steam, will be, that it may be employed as cheaply at a quick as

at a slow rate; 'this is one of the advantages over horse labour.

which becomes more and more expensive as the speed is increased.

There is every reason to expect, that in the end the rate of

travelling by steam will be much quicker than the utmost speed of

travelling by horses; in short, the safety to travellers will

become the limit to speed.' In horse-draught the opposite result

takes place; 'in all cases horses lose power of draught in a much

greater proportion than they gain speed, and hence the work they

do becomes more expensive as they go quicker.'

    Without increase of cost. then. we shall obtain a power which

will insure a rapidity of internal communication far beyond the

utmost speed of horses in draught; and although the performance

of these carriages may not have hitherto attained this point,

when once it has been established, that at equal speed we can use

steam more cheaply in draught than horses, we may fairly

anticipate that every day's increased experience in the

management of the engines, will induce greater skill, greater

confidence, and greater speed. 

    The cheapness of the conveyance will probably be, for some

time, a secondary consideration. If, at present, it can be used

as cheaply as horse power, the competition with the former modes

of conveyance will first take place as to speed. When once the

superiority of steam-carriages shall have been fullv established,

competition will induce economy in the cost of working them. The

evidence. however, of Mr Macneill. showing the greater

efficiency. with diminished expenditure of fuel, by locomotive

engines on railwavs, convinces the committee, that experience

will soon teach a better construction of the engines. and a less

costly mode of generating the requisite supply of steam. 

    Nor are the advantages of steam-power confined to the greater

velocitv attained, or to its greater cheapness than

horse-draught. In the latter, danger is increased. in as large a

proportion as expense. by greater speed. In steam-power, on the

contrary, 'there is no danger of being run away with, and that of

being overturned is greatly diminished. It is difficult to

control four such horses as can draw a heavy carriage ten miles

per hour, in case they are frightened, or choose to run away; and

for quick travelling they must be kept in that state of courage,

that they are always inclined for running away, particularly down

hills, and at sharp turns of the road. In steam, however, there

is little corresponding danger, being perfectly controllable, and

capable of exerting its power in reverse in going down hills.,

Every witness examined has given the fullest and most

satisfactory evidence of the perfect control which the conductor

has over the movement of the carriage. With the slightest

exertion it can be stopped or turned, under circumstances where

horses would be totally unmanageable. 



    338. Another instance may be mentioned in which the object to

be obtained is so important, that although it might be rarely

wanted, yet machinery for that purpose would justify considerable

expense. A vessel to contain men, and to be navigated at some

distance below the surface of the sea, would, in many

circumstances, be almost invaluable. Such a vessel, evidently,

could not be propelled by any engine requiring the aid of fire.

If, however, by condensing air into a liquid, and carrying it in

that state, a propelling power could be procured sufficient for

moving the vessel through a considerable space, the expense would

scarcely render its occasional employment impossible.(3*)

    339. Slide of Alpnach. Amongst the forests which flank many

of the lofty mountains of Switzerland, some of the finest timber

is found in positions almost inaccessible. The expense of roads,

even if it were possible to make them in such situations, would

prevent the inhabitants from deriving any advantages from these

almost inexhaustible supplies. Placed by nature at a considerable

elevation above the spot at which they can be made use of, they

are precisely in fit circumstances for the application of

machinery to their removal; and the inhabitants avail themselves

of the force of gravity to relieve them from some portion of this

labour. The inclined planes which they have established in

various forests, by which the timber has been sent down to the

water courses, have excited the admiration of every traveller;

and in addition to the merit of simplicity, the construction

these slides requires scarcely anything beyond the material which

grows upon the spot. 

    Of all these specimens of carpentry, the Slide of Alpnach was

the most considerable, from its great length, and from the almost

inaccessible position from which it descended. The following

account of it is taken from Gilbert's Annalen, 1819, which is

translated in the second volume of Brewster's Journal: 



For many centuries, the rugged flanks and the deep gorges of

Mount Pilatus were covered with impenetrable forests; which were

permitted to grow and to perish, without being of the least

utility to man, till a foreigner, who had been conducted into

their wild recesses in the pursuit of the chamois, directed the

attention of several Swiss gentlemen to the extent and

superiority of the timber. The most skilful individuals, however,

considered it quite impracticable to avail themselves of such

inaccessible stores. It was not till the end of 1816, that M.

Rupp, and three Swiss gentlemen, entertaining more sanguine

hopes, purchased a certain extent of the forests, and began the

construction of the slide, which was completed in the spring of

1818. 

    The Slide of Alpnach is formed entirely of about 25,000 large

pine trees, deprived of their bark. and united together in a very

ingenious manner, without the aid of iron. It occupied about 160

workmen during eighteen months, and cost nearly 100,000 francs,

or *4,250. It is about three leagues, or 44,000 English feet

long, and terminates in the Lake of Lucerne. It has the form of a

trough, about six feet broad, and from three to six feet deep.

Its bottom is formed of three trees, the middle one of which has

a groove cut out in the direction of its length, for receiving

small rills of water, which are conducted into it from various

places, for the purpose of diminishing the friction. The whole of

the slide is sustained by about 2,000 supports; and in many

places it is attached, in a very ingenious manner, to the rugged

precipices of granite. 

    The direction of the slide is sometimes straight, and

sometimes zig-zag, with an inclination of from 10 degrees to 18

degrees. It is often carried along the sides of hills and the

flanks of precipitous rocks, and sometimes passes over their

summits. Occasionally it goes under ground, and at other times it

is conducted over the deep gorges by scaffoldings 120 feet in

height. 

    The boldness which characterizes this work, the sagacity and

skill displayed in all its arrangements. have excited the wonder

of every person who has seen it. Before any step could be taken

in its erection, it was necessary to cut several thousand trees

to obtain a passage through the impenetrable thickets. All these

difficulties, however, were surmounted, and the engineer had at

last the satisfaction of seeing the trees descend from the

mountain with the rapidity of lightning. The larger pines, which

were about a hundred feet long, and ten inches thick at their

smaller extremity. ran through the space of three leagues, or

nearly nine miles. in two minutes and a half. and during their

descent, they appeared to be only a few feet in length. 

    The arrangements for this part of the operation were

extremely simple. From the lower end of the slide to the upper

end, where the trees were introduced, workmen were posted at

regular distances, and as soon as everything was ready, the

workman at the lower end of the slide cried out to the one above

him, 'Lachez' (let go). The cry was repeated from one to another.

and reached the top of the slide in three minutes. The workmen at

the top of the slide then cried out to the one below him, 'Il

vient' (it comes), and the tree was instantly launched down the

slide, preceded by the crv which was repeated from post to post.

As soon as the tree had reached thebottom, and plunged into the

lake, the cry of lachez was repeated as before, and a new tree

was launched in a similar manner. By these means a tree descended

every five or six minutes, provided no accident happened to the

slide, which sometimes took place, but which was instantly

repaired when it did. 

    In order to show the enormous force which the trees acquired

from the great velocity of their descent, M. Rupp made

arrangements for causing some of the trees to spring from the

slide. They penetrated by their thickest extremities no less than

from eighteen to twenty-four feet into the earth; and one of the

trees having by accident struck against another, it instantly

cleft it through its whole length, as if it had been struck by

lightning. 

    After the trees had descended the slide, they were collected

into rafts upon the lake. and conducted to Lucerne. From thence

they descended the Reuss, then the Aar to near Brugg, afterwards

to Waldshut by the Rhine. then to Basle. and even to the sea when

it was necessary. 

    It is to be regretted that this magnificent structure no

longer exists, and that scarcely a trace of it is to be seen upon

the flanks of Mount Pilatus. Political circumstances having taken

away the principal source of demand for the timber, and no other

market having been found, the operation of cutting and

transporting the trees necessarily ceased.(4*) 



    Professor Playfair, who visited this singular work, states,

that six minutes was the usual time occupied in the descent of a

tree; but that in wet weather, it reached the lake in three

minutes.



NOTES:



1. The author of these pages, with one of his friends, was

recently induced to visit this most interesting establishment,

after midnight, during the progress of a very important debate.

The place was illuminated with gas, and was light as the day:

there was neither noise nor bustle; and the visitors were

received with such calm and polite attention, that they did not,

until afterwards, become sensible of the inconvenience which such

intruders, at a moment of the greatest pressure, must occasion,

nor reflect tha the tranquility which they admired, was the

result of intense and regulated occupation. But the effect of

such checks in the current of business will appear on

recollecting that, as four thousand newspapers are printed off on

one side within the hour, every minute is attended with a loss of

sixty-six impressions. The quarter of an hour, therefore, which

the stranger may think it not unreasonable to claim for the

gratification of his curiosity (and to him this time is but a

moment), may cause a failure in the delivery of a thousand

copies, and disappoint a proportionate number of expectant

readers, in some of our distant towns, to which the morning

papers are dispatched by the earliest and most rapid conveyances

of each day.

    This note is inserted with the further and more general

purpose of calling the attention of those, especially foreigners,

who are desirous of inspecting our larger manufactories, to the

chief cause of the difficulty which frequently attends their

introduction. When the establishment is very extensive, and its

departments skilfully arranged, the exclusion of visitors arises,

not from any illiberal jealousy, nor, generally, from any desire

of concealment, which would, in most cases, be absurd, but from

the substantial inconvenience and loss of time, throughout an

entire series of well-combined operations, which must be

occasioned even by short and causual interruptions.



2. It is true that the transport of letters is not the only

object which this apparatus answers; but the transport of

passengers, which is a secondary object, does in fact put a limit

to the velocity of that of the letters, which is the primary one.



3. A proposal for such a vessel, and description of its

construction. by the author of this volume, may be found in the

Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, Art. Diving Bell. 



4. The mines of Bolanos in Mexico are supplied with timber from

the adjacent mountains by a slide similar to that of Alpnach. It

was constructed by M. Floresi, a gentleman well acquainted with

Switzerland.



Chapter 29



On the Duration of Machinery



    340. The time during which a machine will continue to perform

its work effectually, will depend chiefly upon the perfection

with which it was originally constructed upon the care taken to

keep it in proper repair, particularly to correct every shake or

looseness in the axes - and upon the smallness of the mass and of

the velocity of its moving parts. Everything approaching to a

blow, all sudden change of direction, is injurious. Engines for

producing power, such as windmills, water-mills, and

steam-engines, usually last a long time.(1*)

    341. Many of the improvements which have taken place in

steamengines, have arisen from an improved construction of the

boiler or the fireplace. The following table of the work done by

steam-engines in Cornwall, whilst it proves the importance of

constantly measuring the effects of machinery, shows also the

gradual advance which has been made in the art of constructing

and managing those engines. 



 A table of the duty performed by steam-engines in Cornwall,

showing the average of the whole for each year, and also the

average duty of the best engine in each monthly report 



Years; Approximate number of engines reported; Average duty of

the whole; Average duty of the best engines



 1813; 24; 19,456,000; 26,400,000

 1814; 29; 20.534,232; 32,000,000

 1815; 35; 20.526,160; 28,700,000

 1816; 32; 22,907,110; 32,400,000

 1817; 31; 26,502,259; 41,600,000

 1818; 32; 25,433,783; 39,300,000 

 1819; 37; 26,252,620; 40,000,000

 1820; 37; 28,736,398; 41,300,000

 1821; 39; 28,223,382; 42,800,000

 1822; 45; 28,887,216; 42,500.000

 1823; 45; 28,156,162; 42,l22,000

 1824; 45; 28,326,140; 43,500,000

 1825; 50; 32,000,741; 45,400,000

 1826; 48; 30,486,630; 45,200,000

 1827; 47; 32,100,000; 59,700,000

 1828; 54; 37,100,000; 76,763,000

 1829; 52; 41,220,000; 76,234,307

 1830; 55; 43,350,000; 75,885,519

 1831; 55(2*); 44,700,000; 74,911,365

 1832; 60; 44,400,000; 79,294,114

 1833; 58; 46,000,000; 83,306,092 



    342. The advantage arising from registering the duty done by

steamengines in Cornwall has been so great that the proprietors

of one of the largest mines, on which there are several engines,

find it good economy to employ a man to measure the duty they

perform every day. This daily report is fixed up at a particular

hour, and the enginemen are always in waiting, anxious to know

the state of their engines. As the general reports are made

monthly, if accident should cause a partial stoppage in the flue

of any of the boilers, it might without this daily check continue

two or three weeks before it could be discovered by a falling off

of the duty of the engine. In several of the mines a certain

amount of duty is assigned to each engine; and if it does more,

the proprietors give a premium to the engineers according to its

amount. This is called million money, and is a great stimulus to

economy in working the engine. 

    343. Machinery for producing any commodity in great demand,

seldom actually wears out; new improvements, by which the same

operations can be executed either more quickly or better,

generally superseding it long before that period arrives: indeed,

to make such an improved machine profitable, it is usually

reckoned that in five years it ought to have paid itself, and in

ten to be superseded by a better. 

    'A cotton manufacturer,' says one of the witnesses before a

Committee of the House of Commons, 'who left Manchester seven

years ago, would be driven out of the market by the men who are

now living in it, provided his knowledge had not kept pace with

those who have been, during that time, constantly profiting by

the progressive improvements that have taken place in that

period.'

    344. The effect of improvements in machinery, seems

incidentally to increase production, through a cause which may be

thus explained. A manufacturer making the usual profit upon his

capital, invested in looms or other machines in perfect

condition, the market price of making each of which is a hundred

pounds, invents some improvement. But this is of such a nature,

that it cannot be adapted to his present engines. He finds upon

calculation, that at the rate at which he can dispose of his

manufactured produce, each new engine would repay the cost of its

making, together with the ordinary profit of capital, in three

years: he also concludes from his experience of the trade, that

the improvement he is about to make, will not be generally

adopted by other manufacturers before that time. On these

considerations, it is clearly his interest to sell his present

engines, even at half-price, and construct new ones on the

improved principle. But the purchaser who gives only fifty pounds

for the old engines, has not so large a fixed capital invested in

his factory, as the person from whom he purchased them; and as he

produces the same quantity of the manufactured article, his

profits will be larger. Hence, the price of the commodity will

fall, not only in consequence of the cheaper production by the

new machines, but also by the more profitable working of the old,

thus purchased at a reduced price. This change, however, can be

only transient; for a time will arrive when the old machinery,

although in good repair, must become worthless. The improvement

which took place not long ago in frames for making patent-net was

so great, that a machine, in good repair, which had cost *1200,

sold a few years after for *60. During the great speculations in

that trade, the improvements succeeded each other so rapidly,

that machines which had never been finished were abandoned in the

hands of their makers, because new improvements had superseded

their utility. 

    345. The durability of watches, when well made, is very

remarkable. One was produced, in going order, before a committee

of the House of Commons to enquire into the watch trade, which

was made in the year 1660; and there are many of ancient date, in

the possession of the Clockmaker's Company, which are still

actually kept going. The number of watches manufactured for home

consumption was, in the year 1798, about 50,000 annually. If this

supply was for Great Britain only, it was consumed by about ten

and a half millions of persons. 

    346. Machines are, in some trades, let out to hire, and a

certain sum is paid for their use; in the manner of rent. This is

the case amongst the framework knitters: and Mr Henson, in

speaking of the rate of payment for the use of their frames,

states, that the proprietor receives such a rent that, besides

paying the full interest for his capital, he clears the value of

his frame in nine years. When the rapidity with which

improvements succeed each other is considered, this rent does not

appear exorbitant. Some of these frames have been worked for

thirteen years with little or no repair. But circumstances

occasionally arise which throw them out of employment, either

temporarily or permanently. Some years since, an article was

introduced called cut-up work, by which the price of

stocking-frames was greatly deteriorated. From the evidence of Mr

J. Rawson, it appears that, in consequence of this change in the

nature of the work, each frame could do the work of two, and many

stocking frames were thrown out of employment, and their value

reduced full threefourths.(3*)

    This information is of great importance, if the numbers here

given are nearly correct, and if no other causes intervened to

diminish the price of frames; for it shows the numerical

connection between the increased production of those machines and

their diminished value.

    347. The great importance of simplifying all transactions

between masters and workmen, and of dispassionately discussing

with the latter the influence of any proposed regulations

connected with their trade, is well examplified by a mistake into

which both parties unintentionally fell, and which was productive

of very great misery in the lace trade. Its history is so well

told by William Allen, a framework knitter, who was a party to

it, that an extract from his evidence, as given before the

Framework Knitters' Committee of 1812, will best explain it. 



    I beg to say a few words respecting the frame rent; the rent

paid for lace frames, until the year 1805, was 1s. 6d. a frame

per week; there then was not any very great inducement for

persons to buy frames and let them out by the hire, who did not

belong to the trade; at that time an attempt was made, by one or

two houses, to reduce the prices paid to the workmen, in

consequence of a dispute between these two houses and another

great house: some little difference being paid in the price

amongst the respective houses, I was one chosen by the workmen to

try if we could not remedy the impending evil: we consulted the

respective parties, and found them inflexible; these two houses

that were about to reduce the prices, said that they would either

immediately reduce the price of making net, or they would

increase the frame rent: the difference to the workmen was

considerable, between the one and the other; they would suffer

less, in the immediate operation of the thing, by having the rent

advanced, than the price of making net reduced. They chose at

that time, as they thought, the lesser evil, but it has turned

out to be otherwise; for, immediately as the rent was raised upon

the percentage laid out in frames, it induced almost every

person, who had got a little money, to lay it out in the purchase

of frames; these frames were placed in the hands of men who could

get work for them at the warehouses; they were generally

constrained to pay an enormous rent, and then they were

compelled, most likely, to buy of the persons that let them the

frames, their butcher's meat, their grocery, or their clothing:

the encumbrance of these frames became entailed upon them: if any

deadness took place in the work they must take it at a very

reduced price, for fear of the consequences that would fall upon

them from the person who bought the frame: thus the evil has been

daily increasing, till, in conjunction with the other evils crept

into the trade, they have almost crushed it to atoms. 



    348. The evil of not assigning fairly to each tool, or each

article produced, its proportionate value, or even of not having

a perfectly distinct, simple, and definite agreement between a

master and his workmen, is very considerable. Workmen find it

difficult in such cases to know the probable produce of their

labour; and both parties are often led to adopt arrangements,

which, had they been well examined, would have been rejected as

equally at variance in the results with the true interests of

both. 

    349. At Birmingham, stamps and dies, and presses for a great

variety of articles, are let out: they are generally made by men

possessing small capital, and are rented by workmen. Power also

is rented at the same place. Steam-engines are erected in large

buildings containing a variety of rooms, in which each person may

hire one, two, or any other amount of horsepower, as his

occupation may require. If any mode could be discovered of

transmitting power, without much loss from friction, to

considerable distances, and at the same time of registering the

quantity made use of at any particular point, a considerable

change would probably take place in many departments of the

present system of manufacturing. A few central engines to produce

power, might then be erected in our great towns, and each

workman, hiring a quantity of power sufficient for his purpose,

might have it conveyed into his own house; and thus a transition

might in some instances be effected, if it should be found more

profitable, back again from the system of great factories to that

of domestic manufacture. 

    350. The transmission of water through a series of pipes,

might be employed for the distribution of power, but the friction

would consume a considerable portion. Another method has been

employed in some instances, and is practised at the Mint. It

consists in exhausting the air from a large vessel by means of a

steam-engine. This vessel is connected by pipes, with a small

piston which drives each coining press; and, on opening a valve,

the pressure of the external air forces in the piston. This air

is then admitted to the general reservoir, and pumped out by the

engine. The condensation of air might be employed for the same

purpose; but there are some unexplained facts relating to elastic

fluids, which require further observations and experiment before

they can be used for the conveyance of power to any considerable

distance. It has been found, for instance, in attempting to blow

a furnace by means of a powerful water-wheel driving air through

a cast-iron pipe of above a mile in length, that scarcely any

sensible effect was produced at the opposite extremity. In one

instance, some accidental obstruction being suspected, a cat put

in at one end found its way out without injury at the other, thus

proving that the phenomenon did not depend on interruption within

the pipe. 

    351. The most portable form in which power can be condensed

is, perhaps, by the liquefaction of the gases. It is known that,

under considerable pressure, several of these become liquid at

ordinary temperatures; carbonic acid, for example, is reduced to

a liquid state by a pressure of sixty atmospheres. One of the

advantages attending the use of these fluids, would be that the

pressure exerted by them would remain constant until the last

drop of liquid had assumed the form of gas. If either of the

elements of common air should be found to be capable of reduction

to a liquid state before it unites into a corrosive fluid with

the other ingredient, then we shall possess a ready means of

conveying power in any quantity and to any distance. Hydrogen

probably will require the strongest compressing force to render

it liquid, and may, therefore, possibly be applied where still

greater condensation of power is wanted. In all these cases the

condensed gases may be looked upon as springs of enormous force,

which have been wound up by the exertion of power, and which will

deliver the whole of it back again when required. These springs

of nature differ in some respects from the steel springs formed

by our art; for in the compression of the natural springs a vast

quantity of latent heat is forced out, and in their return to the

state of gas an equal quantity is absorbed. May not this very

property be employed with advantage in their application? 

    Part of the mechanical difficulty to be overcome in

constructing apparatus connected with liquefied gases, will

consist in the structure of the valves and packing necessary to

retain the fluids under the great pressure to which they must be

submitted. The effect of heat on these gases has not yet been

sufficiently tried, to lead us to any very precise notions of the

additional power which its application to them will supply. 

    The elasticity of air is sometimes employed as a spring,

instead of steel: in one of the large printing-machines in London

the momentum of a considerable mass of matter is destroyed by

making it condense the air included in a cylinder, by means of a

piston against which it impinges. 

    352. The effect of competition in cheapening articles of

manufacture sometimes operates in rendering them less durable.

When such articles are conveyed to a distance for consumption, if

they are broken, it often happens, from the price of labour being

higher where they are used than where they were made, that it is

more expensive to mend the old article, than to purchase a new.

Such is usually the case, in great cities, with some of the

commoner locks, with hinges, and with a variety of articles of

hardware. 



NOTES:



1. The amount of obstructions arising from the casual fixing of

trees in the bottom of the river, may be estimated from the

proportion of steamboats destroyed by running upon them, The

subjoined statement is taken from the American Almanack for 1832:



    'Between the years 1811 and 1831, three hundred and

forty-eight steamboats were built on the Mississippi and its

tributary streams During that period a hundred and fifty were

lost or worn out,

'Of this hundred and fifty:

            worn out            63

            lost by snags       36

            burnt               14

            lost by collision    3

            by accidents

                not ascertained 34

Thirty-six, or nearly one fourth, being destroyed by accidental

obstructions. 

    Snag is the name given in America to trees which stand nearly

upright in the stream, with their roots fixed at the bottom. 

    It is usual to divide off at the bow of the steamboats a

watertight chamber, in order that when a hole is made in it by

running against the snags, the water may not enter the rest of

the vessel and sink it instantly.



2. This passage is not printed in italics in the original, but it

has been thus marked in the above extract, from its importance,

and from the conviction that the most extended discussion will

afford additional evidence of its truth. 



3. Report from the Committee of the House of Commons on the

Framework Knitter's Petition, April, 1819.



Chapter 30



On Combinations Amongst Masters or Workmen against Each Other



    353. There exist amongst the workmen of almost all classes,

certain rules or laws which govern their actions towards each

other, and towards their employers. But, besides these general

principles, there are frequently others peculiar to each factory,

which have derived their origin, in many instances, from the

mutual convenience of the parties engaged in them. Such rules are

little known except to those actually pursuing the several

trades; and, as it is of importance that their advantages and

disadvantages should be canvassed, we shall offer a few remarks

upon some of them. 

    354. The principles by which such laws should be tried are,

    First. That they conduce to the general benefit of all the

persons employed.

    Secondly. That they prevent fraud.

    Thirdly. That they interfere as little as possible with the

free agency of each individual. 

    355. It is usual in many workshops, that, on the first

entrance of a new journeyman, he shall pay a small fine to the

rest of the men. It is clearly unjust to insist upon this

payment; and when it is spent in drinking, which is,

unfortunately, too often the case, it is injurious. The reason

assigned for the demand is. that the newcomer will require some

instruction in the habits of the shop, and in the places of the

different tools, and will thus waste the time of some of his

companions until he is instructed. If this fine were added to a

fund, managed by the workmen themselves, and either divided at

given periods, or reserved for their relief in sickness, it would

be less objectionable, since its tendency would be to check the

too frequent change of men from one shop to another. But it

ought, at all events, not to be compulsory. and the advantages to

be derived from the fund to which the workman is invited to

subscribe, ought to be his sole inducement to contribute. 

    356. In many workshops, the workmen, although employed on

totally different parts of the objects manufactured, are yet

dependent, in some measure, upon each other. Thus a single smith

may be able to forge, in one day, work enough to keep four or

five turners employed during the next. If, from idleness or

intemperance, the smith neglects his work, and does not furnish

the usual supply, the turners (supposing them to be paid by the

piece), will have their time partly unoccupied, and their gains

consequently diminished. It is reasonable, in such circumstances,

that a fine should be levied on the delinquent; but it is

desirable that the master should have concurred with his workmen

in establishing such a rule, and that it should be shown to each

individual previously to his engagement; and it is very desirable

that such fine should not be spent in drinking.

    357. In some establishments, it is customary for the master

to give a small gratuity whenever any workman has exercised a

remarkable degree of skill, or has economized the material

employed. Thus, in splitting horn into layers for lanterns, one

horn usually furnishes from five to eight layers; but if a

workman split the horn into ten layers or more, he receives a

pint of ale from the master. These premiums should not be too

high, lest the material should be wasted in unsuccessful

attempts: but such regulations, when judiciously made, are

beneficial, as they tend to produce skill amongst the workmen,

profit to the masters, and diminished cost to the consumers. 

    358. In some few factories, in which the men are paid by the

piece, it is usual, when any portion of work, delivered in by a

workman, is rejected by the master on account of its being badly

executed, to fine the delinquent. Such a practice tends to remedy

one of the evils attendant upon that mode of payment, and greatly

assists the master, since his own judgement is thus supported by

competent and unprejudiced judges. 

    359. Societies exist amongst some of the larger bodies of

workmen, and others have been formed by the masters engaged in

the same branches of trade. These associations have different

objects in view; but it is very desirable that their effects

should be well understood by the individuals who compose them;

and that the advantages arising from them, which are certainly

great, should be separated as much as possible from the evils

which they have, unfortunately, too frequently introduced.

Associations of workmen and of masters may. with advantage, agree

upon rules to be observed by both parties, in estimating the

proportionate value of different kinds of work executed in their

trade, in order that time may be saved, and disputes be

prevented. They may also be most usefully employed in acquiring

accurate information as to the number of persons working in the

various departments of any manufacture, their rate of wages, the

number of machines in use, and other statistical details.

Information of this nature is highly valuable, both for the

guidance of the parties who are themselves most interested, and

to enable them, upon any application to government for

assistance, or with a view to legislative enactments, to supply

those details, without which the propriety of any proposed

measure cannot be duly estimated. Such details may be collected

by men actually engaged in any branch of trade, at a much smaller

expense of time, than by persons less acquainted with, and less

interested in it. 

    360. One of the most legitimate and most important objects of

such associations as we have just mentioned, is to agree upon

ready and certain modes of measuring the quantity of work done by

the workmen. For a long time a difficulty upon this point existed

in the lace trade, which was justly complained of by the men as a

serious grievance; but the introduction of the rack, which counts

the number of holes in the length of the piece, has entirely put

an end to the most fertile cause of disputes. This invention was

adverted to by the Committee of 1812, and a hope was expressed,

in their report, that the same contrivance would be applied to

stocking-frames. It would, indeed, be of great mutual advantage

to the industrious workman, and to the master manufacturer in

every trade, if the machines employed in it could register the

quantity of work which they perform, in the same manner as a

steam-engine does the number of strokes it makes. The

introduction of such contrivances gives a greater stimulus to

honest industry than can readily be imagined, and removes one of

the sources of disagreement between parties, whose real interests

must always suffer by any estrangement between them. 

    361. The effects arising from combinations amongst the

workmen, are almost always injurious to the parties themselves.

There are numerous instances, in which the public suffer by

increased price at the moment, but are ultimately gainers from

the permanent reduction which results; whilst, on the other hand,

the improvements which are often made in machinery in consequence

of 'a strike' amongst the workmen, most frequently do injury, of

greater or less duration, to that particular class which gave

rise to them. As the injury to the men and to their families is

almost always more serious than that which affects their

employers, it is of the utmost importance to the comfort and

happiness of the former class, that they should themselves

entertain sound views upon this question. For this purpose a few

illustrations of the principle which is here maintained, will

probably have greater weight than any reasoning of a more general

nature, though drawn from admitted principles of political

economy. Such instances will, moreover, present the advantage of

appealing to facts known to many individuals of those classes for

whose benefit these reflections are intended. 

    362. There is a process in the manufacture of gun barrels for

making what, in the language of the trade, are called skelps. The

skelp is a piece or bar of iron, about three feet long, and four

inches wide, but thicker and broader at one end than at the

other; and the barrel of a musket is formed by forging out such

pieces to the proper dimensions, and then folding or bending them

into a cylindrical form, until the edges overlap, so that they

can be welded together. 

    About twenty years ago, the workmen, employed at a very

extensive factory in forging these skelps out of bar-iron,

'struck' for an advance of wages; and as their demands were very

exorbitant, they were not immediately complied with. In the

meantime, the superintendent of the establishment directed his

attention to the subject; and it occurred to him, that if the

circumference of the rollers, between which the bar-iron was

rolled, were to be made equal to the length of a skelp, or of a

musket barrel, and if also the groove in which the iron was

compressed, instead of being of the same width and depth

throughout, were cut gradually deeper and wider from a point on

the rollers, until it returned to the same point, then the

bar-iron passing between such rollers, instead of being uniform

in width and thickness, would have the form of a skelp. On making

the trial, it was found to succeed perfectly; a great reduction

of human labour was effected by the process, and the workmen who

had acquired peculiar skill in performing it ceased to derive any

advantage from their dexterity. 

    363. It is somewhat singular that another and a still more

remarkable instance of the effect of combination amongst workmen,

should have occurred but a few years since in the very same

trade. The process of welding the skelps, so as to convert them

into gun barrels, required much skill, and after the termination

of the war, the demand for muskets having greatly diminished, the

number of persons employed in making them was very much reduced.

This circumstance rendered combination more easy; and upon one

occasion, when a contract had been entered into for a

considerable supply to be delivered on a fixed day, the men all

struck for such an advance of wages as would have caused the

completion of the contract to be attended with a very heavy loss.



    In this difficulty, the contractors resorted to a mode of

welding the gun barrel, for which a patent had been taken out by

one of themselves some years before this event. The plan had not

then succeeded so well as to come into general use, in

consequence of the cheapness of the usual mode of welding by hand

labour, combined with some other difficulties with which the

patentee had to contend. But the stimulus produced by the

combination of the workmen, induced him to make new trials, and

he was enabled to introduce such a facility in welding gun

barrels by rollers, and such perfection in the work itself, that,

in all probability, very few will in future be welded by hand

labour. 

    This new process consisted in folding a bar of iron, about a

foot long, into the form of a cylinder, with the edges a little

overlapping. It was then placed in a furnace, and being taken out

when raised to a welding heat, a triblet, or cylinder of iron,

was placed in it, and the whole was passed quickly through a pair

of rollers. The effect of this was, that the welding was

performed at a single heating, and the remainder of the

elongation necessary for extending the skelps to the length of

the musket barrel, was performed in a similar manner, but at a

lower temperature. The workmen who had combined were, of course,

no longer wanted, and instead of benefiting themselves by their

combination, they were reduced permanently, by this improvement

in the art, to a considerably lower rate of wages: for as the

process of welding gun barrels by hand required peculiar skill

and considerable experience, they had hitherto been in the habit

of earning much higher wages than other workmen of their class.

On the other hand, the new method of welding was far less

injurious to the texture of the iron, which was now exposed only

once, instead of three or four times, to the welding heat, so

that the public derived advantage from the superiority, as well

as from the economy of the process. Another process has

subsequently been invented, applicable to the manufacture of a

lighter kind of iron tubes, which can thus be made at a price

which renders their employment very general. They are now to be

found in the shops of all our larger ironmongers. of various

lengths and diameters, with screws cut at each end; and are in

constant use for the conveyance of gas for lighting, or of water

for warming, our houses. 364. Similar examples must have

presented themselves to all those who are familiar with the

details of our manufactories, but these are sufficient to

illustrate one of the results of combinations. It would not,

however, be fair to push the conclusion deduced from these

instances to its extreme limit. Although it is very apparent,

that in the two cases which have been stated, the effects of

combination were permanently injurious to the workman, by almost

immediately placing him in a lower class (with respect to his

wages) than he occupied before; yet they do not prove that all

such combinations have this effect. It is quite evident that they

have all this tendency., it is also certain that considerable

stimulus must be applied to induce a man to contrive a new and

expensive process; and that in both these cases, unless the fear

of pecuniary loss had acted powerfully, the improvement would not

have been made. If, therefore, the workmen had in either case

combined for only a small advance of wages, they would, in all

probability, have been successful, and the public would have been

deprived, for many years, of the inventions to which these

combinations gave rise. It must, however, be observed, that the

same skill which enabled the men to obtain, after long practice,

higher wages than the rest of their class, would prevent many of

them from being permanently thrown back into the class of

ordinary workmen. Their diminished wages will continue only until

they have acquired, by practice, a facility of execution in some

other of the more difficult operations: but a diminution of

wages, even for a year or two, is still a very serious

inconvenience to any person who lives by his daily exertion. The

consequence of combination has then, in these instances, been, to

the workmen who combined - reduction of wages; to the public -

reduction of price; and to the manufacturer increased sale of his

commodity, resulting from that reduction. 

    365. It is, however, important to consider the effects of

combination in another and less obvious point of view. The fear

of combination amongst the men whom he employs, will have a

tendency to induce the manufacturer to conceal from his workmen

the extent of the orders he may at any time have received; and,

consequently, they will always be less acquainted with the extent

of the demand for their labour than they otherwise might be. This

is injurious to their interests; for instead of foreseeing, by

the gradual falling-off in the orders. the approach of a time

when they must be unemployed, and preparing accordingly, they are

liable to much more sudden changes than those to which they would

otherwise be exposed. 

    In the evidence given by Mr Galloway, the engineer, he

remarks, that, 



    When employers are competent to show their men that their

business is steady and certain, and when men find that they are

likely to have permanent employment, they have always better

habits, and more settled notions, which will make them better

men, and better workmen, and will produce great benefits to all

who are interested in their employment. 



    366. As the manufacturer, when he makes a contract, has no

security that a combination may not arise amongst the workmen,

which may render that contract a loss instead of a benefit;

besides taking precautions to prevent them from becoming

acquainted with it, he must also add to the price at which he

could otherwise sell the article, some small increase to cover

the risk of such an occurrence. If an establishment consist of

several branches which can only be carried on jointly, as, for

instance, of iron mines, blast furnaces, and a colliery, in which

there are distinct classes of workmen, it becomes necessary to

keep on hand a larger stock of materials than would be required,

if it were certain that no combinations would arise. 

    Suppose, for instance, the colliers were to 'strike' for an

advance of wages - unless there was a stock of coal above ground,

the furnaces must be stopped, and the miners also would be thrown

out of employ. Now the cost of keeping a stock of iron ore, or of

coals above ground, is just the same as that of keeping in a

drawer, unemployed, its value in money, (except, indeed, that the

coal suffers a small deterioration by exposure to the elements).

The interest of this sum must, therefore, be considered as the

price of an insurance against the risk of combination amongst the

workmen; and it must, so far as it goes, increase the price of

the manufactured article, and, consequently, limit the demand

which would otherwise exist for it. But every circumstance which

tends to limit the demand, is injurious to the workmen; because

the wider the demand, the less it is exposed to fluctuation. 

    The effect to which we have alluded, is by no means a

theoretical conclusion; the proprietors of one establishment in

the iron trade, within the author's knowledge, think it expedient

always to keep above ground a supply of coal for six months,

which is, in that instance, equal in value to about *10,000. When

we reflect that the quantity of capital throughout the country

thus kept unemployed merely from the fear of combinations amongst

the workmen, might, under other circumstances, be used for

keeping a larger number at work, the importance of introducing a

system in which there should exist no inducement to combine

becomes additionally evident. 

    367. That combinations are, while they last, productive of

serious inconveniences to the workmen themselves, is admitted by

all parties; and it is equally true, that, in most cases, a

successful result does not leave them in so good a condition as

they were in before 'the strike,. The little capital they

possessed, which ought to have been hoarded with care for days of

illness or distress, is exhausted; and frequently, in order to

gratify a pride, at the existence of which we cannot but rejoice,

even whilst we regret its misdirected energy, they will undergo

the severest privations rather than return to work at their

former wages. With many of the workmen, unfortunately, during

such periods, bad habits are formed which it is very difficult to

eradicate; and, in all those engaged in such transactions, the

kinder feelings of the heart are chilled, and passions are called

into action which are permanently injurious to the happiness of

the individual, and destructive of those sentiments of confidence

which it is equally the interest of the master manufacturer and

of his workman to maintain. If any of the trade refuse to join in

the strike, the majority too frequently forget, in the excitement

of their feelings, the dictates of justice, and endeavour to

exert a species of tyranny, which can never be permitted to exist

in a free country. In conceding therefore to the working classes,

that they have a right, if they consider it expedient, to combine

for the purpose of procuring higher wages (provided always, that

they have completed all their existing contracts), it ought ever

to be kept before their attention, that the same freedom which

they claim for themselves they are bound to allow to others, who

may have different views of the advantages of combination. Every

effort which reason and kindness can dictate, should be made, not

merely to remove their grievances, but to satisfy their own

reason and feelings, and to show them the consequences which will

probably result from their conduct: but the strong arm of the

law, backed, as in such cases it will always be, by public

opinion, should be instantly and unhesitatingly applied, to

prevent them from violating the liberty of a portion of their

own, or of any other class of society. 

    368. Amongst the evils which ultimately fall heavy on the

working classes themselves, when, through mistaken views, they

attempt to interfere with their employers in the mode of carrying

on their business, may be mentioned the removal of factories to

other situations, where the proprietors may be free from the

improper control of their men. The removal of a considerable

number of lace frames to the western counties, which took place,

in consequence of the combinations in Nottinghamshire, has

already been mentioned. Other instances have occurred, where

still greater injury has been produced by the removal of a

portion of the skill and capital of the country to a foreign

land. Such was the case at Glasgow. as stated in the fifth

Parliamentary Report respecting Artizans and Machinery. One of

the partners in an extensive cotton factory, disgusted by the

unprincipled conduct of the workmen, removed to the state of New

Y ork, where he re-established his machinery, and thus afforded,

to rivals already formidable to our trade, at once a pattern of

our best machinery, and an example of the most economical methods

of employing it. 

    369. When the nature of the work is such that it is not

possible to remove it, as happens with regard to mines, the

proprietors are more exposed to injury from combinations amongst

the workmen: but as the owners are generally possessed of a

larger capital, they generally succeed, if the reduction of wages

which they propose is really founded on the necessity of the

case. 

    An extensive combination lately existed amongst the colliers

in the north of England, which unfortunately led, in several

instances, to acts of violence. The proprietors of the coalmines

were consequently obliged to procure the aid of miners from other

parts of England who were willing to work at the wages they could

afford to give; and the aid of the civil, and in some cases of

the military, power, was requisite for their protection. This

course was persisted in during several months, and the question

being, which party could support itself longest on the diminished

gains, as it might have readily been foreseen, the proprietors

ultimately succeeded. 

    370. One of the remedies employed by the masters against the

occurrence of combinations, is to make engagements with their men

for long periods and to arrange them in such a manner, that these


contracts shall not all terminate together. This has been done in

some cases at Sheffield, and in other places. It is attended with

the inconvenience to the masters that, during periods when the

demand for their produce is reduced, they are still obliged to

employ the same number of workmen. This circumstance, however,

frequently obliges the proprietors to direct their attention to

improvements in their works: and in one such instance, within the

author.s knowledge, a large reservoir was deepened, thus

affording a more constant supply to the water-wheel, whilst, at

the same time, the mud from the bottom gave permanent fertility

to a piece of land previously almost barren. In this case, not

merely was the supply of produce checked, when a glut existed.

but the labour was, in fact, applied more profitably than it

would have been in the usual course. 

    371. A mode of paying the wages of workmen in articles which

they consume, has been introduced into some of our manufacturing

districts, which has been called the truck system. As in many

instances this has nearly the effect of a combination of the

masters against the men, it is a fit subject for discussion in

the present chapter: but it should be carefully distinguished

from another system of a very different tendency, which will be

first described. 

    372. The principal necessaries for the support of a workman

and his family are few in number, and are usually purchased by

him in small quantities weekly. Upon such quantities, sold by the

retail dealer, a large profit is generally made; and if the

article is one whose quality, like that of tea, is not readily

estimated, then a great additional gain is made by the retail

dealer selling an inferior article. 

    Where the number of workmen living on the same spot is large,

it may be thought desirable that they should unite together and

have an agent, to purchase by wholesale those articles which are

most in demand, as tea, suger, bacon, etc., and to retail them at

prices, which will just repay the wholesale cost, together with

the expense of the agent who conducts their sale. If this be

managed wholly by a committee of workmen, aided perhaps by advice

from the master, and if the agent is paid in such a manner as to

have himself an interest in procuring good and reasonable

articles, it may be a benefit to the workmen: and if the plan

succeed in reducing the cost of articles of necessity to the men,

it is clearly the interest of the master to encourage it. The

master may indeed be enabled to afford them facilities in making

their wholesale purchases; but he ought never to have the least

interest in, or any connection with, the profit made by the

articles sold. The men, on the other hand, who subscribe to set

up the shop, ought not, in the slightest degree. to be compelled

to make their purchases there: the goodness and cheapness of the

article ought to be their sole inducements. 

    It may perhaps be objected, that this plan is only employing

a portion of the capital belonging to the workmen in a retail

trade; and that, without it, competition amongst small

shopkeepers will reduce the articles to nearly the same price.

This objection would be valid if the objects of consumption

required no verification; but combining what has been already

stated on that subject(1*) with the present argument, the plan

seems liable to no serious objections. 

    373. The truck system is entirely different in its effects.

The master manufacturer keeps a retail shop for articles required

by his men, and either pays their wages in goods, or compels them

by express agreement, or less directly, by unfair means, to

expend the whole or a certain part of their wages at his shop. If

the manufacturer kept this shop merely for the purpose of

securing good articles, at fair prices, to his workmen, and if he

offered no inducement to them to purchase at his shop, except the

superior cheapness of his articles, it would certainly be

advantageous to the men. But, unfortunately, this is not always

the case; and the temptation to the master, in times of

depression, to reduce in effect the wages which he pays (by

increasing the price of articles at his shop), without altering

the nominal rate of payment, is frequently too great to be

withstood. If the object be solely to procure for his workmen

better articles, it will be more effectually accomplished by the

master confining himself to supplying a small capital, at a

moderate rate of interest; leaving the details to be conducted by

a committee of workmen, in conjunction with his own agent, and

the books of the shop to be audited periodically by the men

themselves. 

    374. Wherever the workmen are paid in goods, or are compelled

to purchase at the master's shop, much injustice is done to them,

and great misery results from it. Whatever may have been the

intentions of the master in such cases, the real effect is, to

deceive the workman as to the amount he receives in exchange for

his labour. Now, the principles on which the happiness of that

class of society depends, are difficult enough to be understood,

even by those who are blessed with far better opportunities of

investigating them: and the importance of their being well

acquainted with those principles which relate to themselves, is

of more vital consequence to workmen, than to many other classes.

It is therefore highly desirable to assist them in comprehending

the position in which they are placed, by rendering all the

relations in which they stand to each other, and to their

employers, as simple as possible. Workmen should be paid entirely

in money; their work should be measured by some unbiassed, some

unerring piece of mechanism; the time during which they are

employed should be defined, and punctually adhered to. The

payments they make to their benefit societies should be fixed on

such just principles, as not to require extraordinary

contributions. In short, the object of all who wish to promote

their happiness should be, to give them, in the simplest form,

the means of knowing beforehand, the sum they are likely to

acquire by their labour, and the money they will be obliged to

expend for their support: thus putting before them, in the

clearest light, the certain result of persevering industry. 

    375. The cruelty which is inflicted on the workman by the

payment of his wages in goods, is often very severe. The little

purchases necessary for the comfort of his wife and children,

perhaps the medicines he occasionally requires for them in

illness, must all be made through the medium of barter; and he is

obliged to waste his time in arranging an exchange, in which the

goods which he has been compelled to accept for his labour are

invariably taken at a lower price than that at which his master

charged them to him. The father of a family perhaps, writhing

under the agonies of the toothache, is obliged to make his hasty

bargain with the village surgeon, before he will remove the cause

of his pain; or the disconsolate mother is compelled to sacrifice

her depreciated goods in exchange for the last receptacle of her

departed offspring. The subjoined evidence from the Report of the

Committee of the House of Commons on Framework Knitters'

Petitions, shows that these are not exaggerated statements. 



    It has been so common in our town to pay goods instead of

money, that a number of my neighbours have been obliged to pay

articles for articles, to pay sugar for drugs out of the

druggist's shop; and others have been obliged to pay sugar for

drapery goods, and such things, and exchange in that way numbers

of times. I was credibly informed, that one person paid half a

pound of tenpenny sugar and a penny to have a tooth drawn; and

there is a credible neighbour of mine told me, that he had heard

that the sexton had been paid for digging a grave with sugar and

tea: and before I came off, knowing I had to give evidence upon

these things, I asked this friend to enquire ofthe sexton,

whether this was a fact: the sexton hesitated for a little time,

on account of bringing into discredit the person who paid these

goods: however, he said at last, 'I have received these articles

repeatedly - I know these things have been paid to a great extent

in this way.'



NOTES:



1. See Chapter XV, p. 87



Chapter 31



On Combinations of Masters against the public





    376. A species of combination occasionally takes place

amongst manufacturers against persons having patents: and these

combinations are always injurious to the public, as well as

unjust to the inventors. Some years since, a gentleman invented a

machine, by which modellings and carvings were cut in mahogany,

and other fine woods. The machine resembled, in some measure, the

drilling apparatus employed in ornamental lathes; it produced

beautiful work at a very moderate expense: but the cabinetmakers

met together, and combined against it, and the patent has

consequently never been worked. A similar fate awaited a machine

for cutting veneers by means of a species of knife. In this

instance, the wood could be cut thinner than by the circular saw,

and no waste was incurred; but 'the trade' set themselves against

it, and after a heavy expense, it was given up. 

    The excuse alleged for this kind of combination, was the fear

entertained by the cabinetmakers that when the public became

acquainted with the article, the patentee would raise the price. 

    Similar examples of combination seem not to be unfrequent, as

appears by the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons on

Patents for Inventions, June, 1829. See the evidence of Mr

Holdsworth. 

    377. There occurs another kind of combination against the

public, with which it is difficult to deal. It usually ends in a

monopoly, and the public are then left to the discretion of the

monopolists not to charge them above the growling point - that

is, not to make them pay so much as to induce them actually to

combine against the imposition. This occurs when two companies

supply water or gas to consumers by means of pipes laid down

under the pavement in the street of cities: it may possibly occur

also in docks, canals, railroads, etc., and in other cases where

the capital required is very large, and the competition very

limited. If water or gas companies combine, the public

immediately loses all the advantage of competition, and it has

generally happened, that at the end of a period during which they

have undersold each other, the several companies have agreed to

divide the whole district supplied. into two or more parts, each

company then removing its pipes from all the streets except those

in its own portion. This removal causes great injury to the

pavement, and when the pressure of increased rates induces a new

company to start. the same inconvenience is again produced.

Perhaps one remedy against evils of this kind might be, when a

charter is granted to such companies, to restrict, to a certain

amount, the rate of profit on the shares, and to direct that any

profits beyond, shall accumulate for the repayment of the

original capital. This has been done in several late Acts of

Parliament establishing companies. The maximum rate of profit

allowed ought to be liberal, to compensate for the risk; the

public ought to have auditors on their part, and the accounts

should be annually published, for the purpose of preventing the

limitations from being exceeded. It must however be admitted,

that this would be an interference with capital, which, if

allowed, should, in the present state of our knowledge, be.

examined with great circumspection in each individual case, until

some general principle is established on well-admitted grounds. 

    378. An instrument called a gas-meter, which ascertains the

quantity of gas used by each consumer, has been introduced, and

furnishes a satisfactory mode of determining the payments to be


made by individuals to the gas companies. A contrivance somewhat

similar in its nature, might be used for the sale of water; but

in that case some public inconvenience might be apprehended, from

the diminished quantity which would then run to waste: the

streams of water running through the sewers in London, are

largely supplied from this source; and if this supply were

diminished, the drainage of the metropolis might be injuriously

affected. 

    379. In the north of England a powerful combination has long

existed among the coal-owners, by which the public has suffered

in the payment of increased price. The late examination of

evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons, has

explained its mode of operation, and the Committee have

recommended, that for the present the sale of coal should be left

to the. competition of other districts. 

    380. A combination, of another kind, exists at this moment to

a great extent, and operates upon the price of the very pages

which are now communicating information respecting it. A subject

so interesting to every reader, and still more so to every

manufacturer ofthe article which the reader consumes, deserves an

attentive examination.

    We have shown in Chapter XXI, p. 144, the component parts of

the expense of each copy of the present work; and we have seen

that the total amount of the cost of its production, exclusive of

any payment to the author for his labour, is 2s. 3d.(1*)

    Another fact, with which the reader is more practically

familiar, is that he has paid, or is to pay, to his bookseller,

six shillings for the volume. Let us now examine into the

distribution of these six shillings, and then, having the facts

ofthe case before us, we shall be better able to judgeofthe

meritsofthe combinationjust mentioned, andtoexplainits effects. 



 Distribution of the profits on a six shilling book



 Buys at; Sells at; Profit on capital expended

 s. d.; s. d. 



No. I - The publisher who accounts to the author for every copy

received; 3 10; 4 2; 10 per cent

No. II - The bookseller who retails to the public; 4 2; 6 0; 44

 Or, 4 6; 6 0; 33 1/3 



    No. I, the publisher, is a bookseller; he is, in fact, the

author's agent. His duties are, to receive and take charge of the

stock, for which he supplies warehouse room; to advise the author

about the times and methods of advertising; and to insert the

advertisements. As he publishes other books, he will advertise

lists of those sold by himself; and thus, by combining many in

one advertisement, diminish the expense to each of his

principals. He pays the author only for the books actually sold;

consequently, he makes no outlav of capital, except that which he

pays for advertisements: but he is answerable for any bad debts

he may contract in disposing of them. His charge is usually ten

per cent on the returns. 

    No. II is the bookseller who retails the work to the public.

On the publication of a new book, the publisher sends round to

the trade, to receive 'subscriptions' from them for any number of

copies not less than two These copies are usually charged to the

'subscribers', on an average, at about four or five per cent less

than the wholesale price of the book: in the present case the

subscription price is 4s. 2d. for each copy. After the day of

publication, the price charged by the publisher to the

booksellers is 4s. 6d. With some works it is the custom to

deliver twentyfive copies to those who order twenty-four, thus

allowing a reduction of about four per cent. Such was the case

with the present volume. Different publishers offer different

terms to the subscribers; and it is usual, after intervals of

about six months, for the publisher again to open a subscription

list, so that if the work be one for which there is a steady

sale, the trade avail themselves of these opportunities

ofpurchasing, at the reduced rate, enough to supply their

probable demand.(2*)

    381. The volume thus purchased of the publisher at 4s. 2d. or

4s. 6d. is retailed by the bookseller to the public at 6s. In the

first case he makes a profit of forty-four, in the second of

thirty-three per cent. Even the smaller of these two rates of

profit on the capital employed, appears to be much too large. It

may sometimes happen, that when a book is enquired for, the

retail dealer sends across the street to the wholesale agent, and

receives, for this trifling service, one fourth part of the money

paid by the purchaser; and perhaps the retail dealer takes also

six months' credit for the price which the volume actually cost

him. 

    382. In section 256, the price of each process in

manufacturing the present volume was stated: we shall now give an

analysis of the whole expense of conveying it into the hands of

the public. 



 The retail price 6s. on 3052 produces 915 12 0



1. Total expense of printing and paper 207 5 8 7/11

2. Taxes on paper and advertisements 40 0 11

3. Commission to publisher as agent between author and printer 18

14 4 4/11 4 Commission to publisher as agent for sale of the book

63 11 8

5. Profit - the difference between subscription price and trade

price, 4d. per vol. 50 17 4

6. Profit the difference between trade price and retail price,

1s. 6d. per vol. 228 18 0

            362 1 4

7. Remains for authorship 306 4 0



 Total 915 12 0



    This account appears to disagree with that in page 146. but

it will be observed that the three first articles amount to *266

1s., the sum there stated. The apparent difference arises from a

circumstance which was not noticed in the first edition of this

work. The bill amounting to *205 18s., as there given, and as

reprinted in the present volume, included an additional charge of

ten per cent upon the real charges of the printer and

paper-maker. 

    383. It is usual for the publisher, when he is employed as

agent between the author and printer, to charge a commission of

ten per cent on all payments he makes. If the author is informed

of this custom previously to his commencing the work, as was the

case in the present instance, he can have no just cause of

complaint; for it is optional whether he himself employs the

printer, or communicates with him through the intervention of his

publisher. 

    The services rendered for this payment are, the making

arrangements with the printer, the wood-cutter, and the engraver,

if required. There is a convenience in having some intermediate

person between the author and printer, in case the former should

consider any of the charges made by the latter as too high. When

the author himself is quite unacquainted with the details of the

art of printing, he may object to charges which, on a better

acquaintance with the subject, he might be convinced were very

moderate; and in such cases he ought to depend on the judgement

of his publisher, who is generally conversant with the art. This

is particularly the case in the charge for alterations and

corrections, some of which, although apparently trivial, occupy

the compositors much time in making. It should also be observed

that the publisher, in this case, becomes responsible for the

payments to those persons. 

    384. It is not necessary that the author should avail himself

of this intervention, although it is the interest of the

publisher that he should; and booksellers usually maintain that

the author cannot procure his paper or printing at a cheaper rate

if he go at once to the producers. This appears from the evidence

given before the Committee of the House of Commons in the

Copyright Acts, 8 May, 1818. 

    Mr O. Rees, bookseller, of the house of Longman and Co.,

Paternoster Row, examined: 

    Q. Suppose a gentleman to publish a work on his own account,

and to incur all the various expenses; could he get the paper at

30s. a ream? 

    A. I presume not; I presume a stationer would not sell the

paper at the same price to an indifferent gentleman as to the

trade. 

    Q. The Committee asked you if a private gentleman was to

publish a work on his own account, if he would not pay more for

the paper than persons in the trade; the Committee wish to be

informed whether a printer does not charge a gentleman a higher

rate than to a publisher. 

    A. I conceive they generally charge a profit on the paper.

    Q. Do not the printers charge a higher price also for

printing, than they do to the trade? 

    A. I always understood that they do.



    385. There appears to be little reason for this distinction

in charging for printing a larger price to the author than to the

publisher, provided the former is able to give equal security for

the payment. With respect to the additional charge on paper, if

the author employs either publisher or printer to purchase it,

they ought to receive a moderate remuneration for the risk, since

they become responsible for the payment; but there is no reason

why, if the author deals at once with the paper-maker, he should

not purchase on the same terms as the printer; and if he choose,

by paying ready money, not to avail himself of the long credit

allowed in those trades, he ought to procure his paper

considerably cheaper. 

    386. It is time, however, that such conventional combinations

between different trades should be done away with. In a country

so eminently depending for its wealth on its manufacturing

industry, it is of importance that there should exist no abrupt

distinction of classes, and that the highest of the aristocracy

should feel proud of being connected, either personally or

through their relatives, with those pursuits on which their

country's greatness depends. The wealthier manufacturers and

merchants already mix with those classes, and the larger and even

the middling tradesmen are frequently found associating with the

gentry of the land. It is good that this ambition should be

cultivated, not by any rivalry in expense, but by a rivalry in

knowledge and in liberal feelings; and few things would more

contribute to so desirable an effect, than the abolition of all

such contracted views as those to which we have alluded. The

advantage to the other classes, would be an increased

acquaintance with the productive arts of the country an increased

attention to the importance of acquiring habits of punctuality

and of business and, above all, a general feeling that it is

honourable, in any rank of life, to increase our own and our

country's riches, by employing our talents in the production or

in the distribution of wealth. 

    387. Another circumstance omitted to be noticed in the first

edition relates to what is technically called the overplus, which

may be now explained. When 500 copies of a work are to be

printed, each sheet of it requires one ream of paper. Now a ream,

as used by printers, consists of 21 1/2 quires, or 516 sheets.

This excess of sixteen sheets is necessary in order to allow for

'revises' - for preparing and adjusting the press for the due

performance of its work, and to supply the place of any sheets

which may be accidentally dirtied or destroyed in the processes

of printing, or injured by the binder in putting into boards. It

is found, however, that three per cent is more than the

proportion destroyed, and that damage is less frequent in

proportion to the skill and care of the workmen. 

    From the evidence of several highly respectable booksellers

and printers, before the Committee of the House of Commons on the

Copyright Act, May, 1818, it appears that the average number of

surplus copies, above 500, is between two and three; that on

smaller impressions it is less, whilst on larger editions it is

greater; that, in some instances, the complete number of 500 is

not made up, in which case the printer is obliged to pay for

completing it; and that in no instance have the whole sixteen

extra copies been completed. On the volume in the reader's hands,

the edition of which consisted of 3000, the surplus amounted to

fifty-two - a circumstance arising from the improvements in

printing and the increased care of the pressmen. Now this

overplus ought to be accounted for to the author - and I believe

it usually is so by all respectable publishers. 

    388. In order to prevent the printer from privately taking

off a larger number of impressions than he delivers to the author

or publisher, various expedients have been adopted. In some works

a particular watermark has been used in paper made purposely for

the book: thus the words 'Mecanique Celeste' appear in the

watermark of the two first volumes of the great work of Laplace.

In other cases, where the work is illustrated by engravings, such

a fraud would be useless without the concurrence of the

copperplate printer. In France it is usual to print a notice on

the back of the title page, that no copies are genuine without

the subjoined signature of the author: and attached to this

notice is the author's name, either written, or printed by hand

from a wooden block. But notwithstanding this precaution, I have

recently purchased a volume, printed at Paris, in which the

notice exists, but no signature is attached. In London there is

not much danger of such frauds, because the printers are men of

capital, to whom the profit on such a transaction would be

trifling, and the risk of the detection of a fact, which must of

necessity be known to many of their workmen, would be so great as

to render the attempt at it folly.

    389. Perhaps the best advice to an author, if he publishes on

his own account, and is a reasonable person, possessed of common

sense, would be to go at once to a respectable printer and make

his arrangements with him. 

    390. If the author do not wish to print his work at his own

risk, then he should make an agreement with a publisher for an

edition of a limited number; but he should by no means sell the

copyright. If the work contains woodcuts or engravings, it would

be judicious to make it part of the contract that they shall

become the author's property, with the view to their use in a

subsequent edition of the works, if they should be required. An

agreement is frequently made by which the publisher advances the

money and incurs all the risk on condition of his sharing the

profits with the author. The profits alluded to are. for the

present work, the last item of section 382, or *306 4s. 

    391. Having now explained all the arrangements in printing

the present volume, let us return to section 382, and examine the

distribution of the *915 paid by the public. Of this sum *207 was

the cost of the book, *40 was taxes, *3S2 was the charges of the

bookseller in conveying it to the consumer, and *306 remained for

authorship. 

    The largest portion, or *362 goes into the pockets of the

booksellers; and as they do not advance capital, and incur very

little risk, this certainly appears to be an unreasonable

allowance. The most extravagant part of the charge is the

thirty-three per cent which is allowed as profit on retailing the

book. 

    It is stated, however, that all retail booksellers allow to

their customers a discount of ten per cent upon orders above

20s., and that consequently the nominal profit of forty-four or

thirty-three per cent is very much reduced. If this is the case,

it may fairly be enquired, why the price of *2 for example, is

printed upon the back of a book, when every bookseller is ready

to sell it at *1 16s., and why those who are unacquainted with

that circumstance should be made to pay more than others who are

better informed? 

    392. Several reasons have been alleged as justifying this

high rate of profit. 

    First, it has been alleged that the purchasers of books take

long credit. This, probably, is often the case, and admitting it,

no reasonable person can object to a proportionate increase of

price. But it is no less clear, that persons who do pay ready

money, should not be charged the same price as those who defer

their payments to a remote period. 

    Secondly, it has been urged that large profits are necessary

to pay for the great expenses of bookselling establishments; that

rents are high and taxes heavy; and that it would be impossible

for the great booksellers to compete with the smaller ones,

unless the retail profits were great. In reply to this it may be

observed that the booksellers are subject to no peculiar pressure

which does not attach to all other retail trades. It may also be

remarked that large establishments always have advantages over

smaller ones, in the economy arising from the division of labour;

and it is scarcely to be presumed that booksellers are the only

class who, in large concerns. neglect to avail themselves of

them. 

    Thirdly, it has been pretended that this high rate of profit

is necessary to cover the risk of the bookseller's having some

copies left on his shelves; but he is not obliged to buy of the

publisher a single copy more than he has orders for: and if he do

purchase more, at the subscription price, he proves, by the very

fact, that he himself does not estimate that risk at more than

from four to eight per cent. 

    393. It has been truly observed, on the other hand, that many

copies of books are spoiled by persons who enter the shops of

booksellers without intending to make any purchase. But, not to

mention that such persons finding on the tables various new

publications, are frequently induced, by that opportunity of

inspecting them, to become purchasers: this damage does not apply

to all booksellers nor to all books; of course it is not

necessary to keep in the shop books of small probable demand or

great price. In the present case, the retail profit on three

copies only, namely, 4s. 6d., would pay the whole cost of the one

copy soiled in the shop; and even that copy might afterwards

produce, at an auction, half or a third of its cost price. The

argument, therefore, from disappointments in the sale of books,

and that arising from heavy stock, are totally groundless in the

question between publisher and author. It shold be remarked also,

that the publisher is generally a retail, as well as a wholesale,

bookseller; and that, besides his profit upon every copy which he

sells in his capacity of agent, he is allowed to charge the

author as if every copy had been subscribed for at 4s. 2d., and

of course he receives the same profit as the rest of the

wholesale traders for the books retailed in his own shop. 

    394. In the country, there is more reason for a considerable

allowance between the retail dealer and the public; because the

profit of the country bookseller is diminished by the expense of

the carriage of the books from London. He must also pay a

commission, usually five per cent, to his London agent, on all

those books which his correspondent does not himself publish. If

to this be added a discount of five per cent, allowed for ready

money to every customer, and of ten per cent to book clubs, the

profit of the bookseller in a small country town is by no means

too large. 

    Some of the writers, who have published criticisms on the

observations made in the first edition of this work, have

admitted that the apparent rate of profit to the booksellers is

too large. But they have, on the other hand, urged that too

favourable a case is taken in supposing the whole 3000 copies

sold. If the reader will turn back to section 382, he will find

that the expense of the three first items remains the same,

whatever be the number of copies sold; and on looking over the

remaining items he will perceive that the bookseller, who incurs

very little risk and no outlay, derives exactly the same profit

per cent on the copies sold, whatever their numbers may be. This,

however, is not the case with the unfortunate author, on whom

nearly the whole of the loss falls undivided. The same writers

have also maintained, that the profit is fixed at the rate

mentioned, in order to enable the bookseller to sustain losses,

unavoidably incurred in the purchase and retail of other books.

This is the weakest of all arguments. It would be equally just

that a merchant should charge an extravagant commission for an

undertaking unaccompanied with any risk, in order to repay

himself for the losses which his own want of skill might lead to

in his other mercantile transactions.

    395. That the profit in retailing books is really too large,

is proved by several circumstances: First, that the same nominal

rate of profit has existed in the bookselling trade for a long

series of years, notwithstanding the great fluctuations in the

rate of profit on capital invested in every other business.

Secondly, that, until very lately, a multitude of booksellers, in

all parts of London, were content with a much smaller profit, and

were willing to sell for ready money, or at short credit, to

persons of undoubted character, at a profit of only ten per cent,

and in some instances even at a still smaller percentage, instead

of that of twenty-five per cent on the published prices. Thirdly,

that they are unable to maintain this rate of profit except by a

combination, the object of which is to put down all competition. 

    396. Some time ago a small number of the large London

booksellers entered into such a combination. One of their objects

was to prevent any bookseller from selling books for less than

ten per cent under the published prices; and in order to enforce

this principle, they refuse to sell books. except at the

publishing price, to any bookseller who declines. signing an

agreement to that effect. By degrees, many were prevailed upon to

join this combination; and the effect of the exclusion it

inflicted, left the small capitalist no option between signing or

having his business destroyed. Ultimately, nearly the whole

trade, comprising about two thousand four hundred persons, have

been compelled to sign the agreement. 

    As might be naturally expected from a compact so injurious to

many of the parties to it, disputes have arisen; several

booksellers have been placed under the ban of the combination,

who allege that they have not violated its rules, and who accuse

the opposite party of using spies, etc., to entrap them.(3*)

    397. The origin of this combination has been explained by Mr

Pickering, of Chancery Lane, himself a publisher, in a printed

statement, entitled, 'Booksellers' Monopoly' and the following

list of booksellers, who form the committee for conducting this

combination, is copied from that printed at the head of each of

the cases published by Mr Pickering: 



 Allen, J., 7, Leadenhall Street.

 Arch, J., 61, Cornhill.

 Baldwin, R., 47, Paternoster Row.

 Booth, J.

 Duncan, J., 37, Paternoster Row.

 Hatchard, J., Piccadilly.

 Marshall, R., Stationers' Court.

 Murray, J., Albemarle Street.

 Rees, O., 39, Paternoster Row.

 Richardson, J. M., 23, Cornhill.

 Rivington, J., St. Paul's Churchyard.

 Wilson, E., Royal Exchange.



    398. In whatever manner the profits are divided between the

publisher and the retail bookseller, the fact remains, that the

reader pays for the volume in his hands 6s., and that the author

will receive only 3s. 10d.; out of which latter sum, the expense

of printing the volume must be paid: so that in passing through

two hands this book has produced a profit of forty-four per cent.

This excessive rate of profit has drawn into the book trade a

larger share of capital than was really advantageous; and the

competition between the different portions of that capital has

naturally led to the system of underselling, to which the

committee above mentioned are endeavouring to put a stop.(4*)

    399. There are two parties who chiefly suffer from this

combination the public and authors. The first party can seldom be

induced to take an active part against any grievance; and in fact

little is required from it, except a cordial support of the


authors, in any attempt to destroy a combination so injurious to

the interests of both. 

    Many an industrious bookseller would be glad to sell for 5s.

the volume which the reader holds in his hand, and for which he

has paid 6s.; and, in doing so for ready money, the tradesman who

paid 4s. 6d. for the book, would realize, without the least risk,

a profit of eleven per cent on the money he had advanced. It is

one of the objects of the combination we are discussing, to

prevent the small capitalist from employing his capital at that

rate of profit which he thinks most advantageous to himself; and

such a proceeding is decidedly injurious to the public. 

    400. Having derived little pecuniary advantage from my own

literary productions; and being aware, that from the very nature

of their subjects, they can scarcely be expected to reimburse the

expense of preparing them, I may be permitted to offer an opinion

upon the subject, which I believe to be as little influenced by

any expectation of advantage from the future, as it is by any

disappointment at the past. 

    Before, however, we proceed to sketch the plan of a campaign

against Paternoster Row, it will be fit to inform the reader of

the nature of the enemies' forces, and of his means of attack and

defence. Several of the great publishers find it convenient to be

the proprietors of reviews, magazines, journals, and even of

newspapers. The editors are paid, in some instances very

handsomely, for their superintendence; and it is scarcely to be

expected that they should always mete out the severest justice on

works by the sale of which their employers are enriched. The

great and popular works of the day are, of course, reviewed with

some care, and with deference to public opinion. Without this,

the journals would not sell; and it is convenient to be able to

quote such articles as instances of impartiality. Under shelter

of this, a host of ephemeral productions are written into a

transitory popularity; and by the aid of this process, the

shelves of the booksellers, as well as the pockets of the public,

are disencumbered. To such an extent are these means employed,

that some of the periodical publications of the day ought to be

regarded merely as advertising machines. That the reader may be

in some measure on his guard against such modes of influencing

his judgement, he should examine whether the work reviewed is

published by the bookseller who is the proprietor of the review;

a fact which can sometimes be ascertained from the title of the

book as given at the head of the article. But this is by no means

a certain criterion, because partnerships in various publications

exist between houses in the book trade, which are not generally

known to the public; so that, in fact, until reviews are

established in which booksellers have no interest, they can never

be safely trusted. 

    401. In order to put down the combination of booksellers, no

plan appears so likely to succeed as a counter-association of

authors. If any considerable portion of the literary world were

to unite and form such an association; and if its affairs were

directed by an active committee, much might be accomplished. The

objects of such an union should be, to employ some person well

skilled in the printing, and in the bookselling trade; and to

establish him in some central situation as their agent. Each

member of the association to be at liberty to place any, or all

of his works in the hands of this agent for sale; to allow any

advertisements, or list of books published by members of the

association, to be stitched up at the end of each of his own

productions; the expense of preparing them being defrayed by the

proprietors of the books advertised. 

    The duties of the agent would be to retail to the public, for

ready money, copies of books published by members of the

association. To sell to the trade, at prices agreed upon, any

copies they may require. To cause to be inserted in the journals,

or at the end of works published. bv members. any advertisements

which the committee or authors may direct. To prepare a general

catalogue of the works of members. To be the agent for any member

of the association respecting the printing of any work. 

    Such a union would naturally present other advantages; and as

each author would retain the liberty of putting any price he

might think fit on his productions, the public would have the

advantage of reduction in price produced by competition between

authors on the same subject, as well as of that arising from a

cheaper mode of publishing the volumes sold to them. 

    402. Possibly, one of the consequences resulting from such an

association, would be the establishment of a good and an

impartial review, a work the want of which has been felt for

several years. The two long-established and celebrated reviews,

the unbending champions of the most opposite political opinions.

are, from widely differing causes. exhibiting unequivocal signs

of decrepitude and decay. The quarterly advocate of despotic

principles is fast receding from the advancing intelligence of

the age; the new strength and new position which that

intelligence has acquired, demands for its expression, new

organs, equally the representatives of its intellectual power,

and of its moral energies: whilst, on the other hand, the sceptre

of the northern critics has passed, from the vigorous grasp of

those who established its dominion, into feebler hands. 

    403. It may be stated as a difficulty in realizing this

suggestion, that those most competent to supply periodical

criticism, are already engaged. But it is to be observed, that

there are many who now supply literary criticisms to journals,

the political principles of which they disapprove; and that if

once a respectable and well-supported review(5*) were

established, capable of competing, in payment to its

contributors, with the wealthiest of its rivals. it would very

soon be supplied with the best materials the country can produce.

(6*) It may also be apprehended that such a combination of

authors would be favourable to each other. There are two

temptations to which an editor of a review is commonly exposed:

the first is, a tendency to consult too much, in the works he

criticizes, the interest of the proprietor of his review; the

second, a similar inclination to consult the interests of his

friends. The plan which has been proposed removes one of these

temptations, but it would be very difficult, if not impossible,

to destroy the other.



NOTES:



1. The whole of the subsequent details relate to the first

edition of this work.



2. These details vary with different books and different

publishers; those given in the text are believed to substantially

correct, and are applicable to works like the present.



3. It is now understood that the use of spies has been given up;

and it is also known that the system of underselling is again

privately resorted to by many. so that the injury arising from

this arbitrary system, pursued by the great booksellers, affects

only, or most severely, those whose adherence to an extorted

promise most deserves respect. Note to the second edition. 



4 The monopoly cases. Nos. 1. 2. and 3. of those published by Mr

Pickering. should be consulted upon this point; and, as the

public will be better able to form a judgement by hearing the

other side of the question. it is to be hoped the Chairman of the

Committee (Mr Richardson) will publish those regulations

respecting the trade, a copy of which. Mr Pickering states. is

refused by the Committee even to those who sign them. 



5. At the moment when this opinion as to the necessity for a new

review was passing through the press. I was informed that the

elements of such an undertaking were already organized.



6. I have been suggested to me, that the doctrines maintained in

this chapter may subject the present volume to the opposition of

that combination which it has opposed. I do not entertain that

opinion; and for this reason, that the booksellers are too shrewd

a class to supply such an admirable passport to publicity as

their opposition would prove to be if generally suspected. But

should my readers take a different view of the question, they can

easily assist in remedying the evil, by each mentioning the

existence of this little volume to two of his friends.

    {I was wrong in this conjecture; all booksellers are not so

shrewd as I had imagined, for some did refuse to sell this

volume; consequently others sold a larger number of copies.

    In the preface to the second edition, at the commencement of

this volume, the reader will find some further observation on the

effect of the booksellers' combination.}



Chapter 23



On the Effect of Machinery in Reducing the Demand for Labour



    404. One of the objections most frequently urged against

machinery is, that it has a tendency to supersede much of the

hand labour which was previously employed; and in fact unless a

machine diminished the labour necessary to make an article, it

could never come into use. But if it have that effect, its owner,

in order to extend the sale of his produce, will be obliged to

undersell his competitors; this will induce them also to

introduce the new machine, and the effect of this competition

will soon cause the article to fall, until the profits on

capital, under the new system, shall be reduced to the same rate

as under the old. Although, therefore, the use of machinery has

at first a tendency to throw labour out of employment, yet the

increased demand consequent upon the reduced price, almost

immediately absorbs a considerable portion of that labour, and

perhaps, in some cases, the whole of what would otherwise have

been displaced. 

    That the effect of a new machine is to diminish the labour

required for the production of the same quantity of manufactured

commodities may beclearlyperceived, byimaginingasociety,

inwhichoccupation are not divided, each man himself manufacturing

all the articles he consumes. Supposing each individual to labour

during ten hours daily, one of which is devoted to making shoes,

it is evident that if any tool or machine be introduced, by the

use ofwhich his shoes can be made in halfthe usual time, then

each member ofthe community will enjoy the same comforts as

before by only nine and one-half hours' labour. 

    405. If, therefore, we wish to prove that the total quantity

oflabourisnot diminished by the introduction of machines, we must

have recourse to some other principle of our nature. But the same

motive which urges a man to activity will become additionally

powerful, when he finds his comforts procured with diminished

labour; and in such circumstances, it is probable, that many

would employ the time thus redeemed in contriving new tools for

other branches of their occupations. He who has habitually worked

ten hours a day, will employ the half hour saved by the new

machine in gratifying some other want; and as each new machine

adds to these gratifications, new luxuries will open to his view,

which continued enjoyment will as surely render necessary to his

happiness. 

    406. In countries where occupations are divided, and where

the division of labour is practised, the ultimate consequence of

improvements in machinery is almost invariably to cause a greater

demand for labour. Frequently the new labour requires, at its

commencement, a higher degree of skill than the old; and,

unfortunately, the class of persons driven out of the old

employment are not always qualified for the new one; so that a

certain interval must elapse before the whole of their labour is

wanted. This, for a time, produces considerable suffering amongst

the working classes; and it is of great importance for their

happiness that they should be aware of these effects, and be

enabled to foresee them at an early period, in order to diminish,

as much as possible, the injury resulting from them. 

    407. One very important enquiry which this subject presents

is the question whether it is more for the interest of the

working classes, that improved machinery should be so perfect as

to defy the competition of hand labour; and that they should thus

be at once driven out of the trade by it; or be gradually forced

to quit it by the slow and successive advances of the machine?

The suffering which arises from a quick transition is undoubtedly

more intense; but it is also much less permanent than that which

results from the slower process: and if the competition is

perceived to be perfectly hopeless, the workman will at once set

himself to learn a new department of his art. On the other hand,

although new machinery causes an increased demand for skill in

those who make and repair it, and in those who first superintend

its use; yet there are other cases in which it enables children

and inferior workmen to execute work that previously required

greater skill. In such circumstances, even though the increased

demand for the article, produced by its diminished price, should

speedily give occupation to all who were before employed, yet the

very diminution of the skill required, would open a wider field

of competition amongst the working classes themselves. 

    That machines do not, even at their first introduction,

invariably throw human labour out of employment, must be

admitted; and it has been maintained, by persons very competent

to form an opinion on the subject, that they never produce that

effect. The solution of this question depends on facts, which,

unfortunately, have not yet been collected: and the circumstance

of our not possessing the data necessary for the full examination

of so important a subject, supplies an additional reason for

impressing, upon the minds of all who are interested in such

enquiries. the importance of procuring accurate registries, at

various times, of the number of persons employed in particular

branches of manufacture, of the number of machines used by them.

and of the wages they receive. 

    408. In relation to the enquiry just mentioned, I shall offer

some remarks upon the facts within my knowledge; and only regret

that those which I can support by numerical statement are so few.

When the crushing mill, used in Cornwall and other mining

countries, superseded the labour of a great number of young

women, who worked very hard in breaking ores with flat hammers,

no distress followed. The reason of this appears to have been,

that the proprietors of the mines, having one portion of their

capital released by the superior cheapness of the process

executed by the mills, found it their interest to apply more

labour to other operations. The women, disengaged from mere

drudgery, were thus profitably employed in dressing the ores, a

work which required skill and judgement in the selection. 

    409. The increased production arising from alterations in the

machinery, or from improved modes of using it. appears from the

following table. A machine called in the cotton manufacture a

'stretcher', worked by one man. produced as follows: 



 Year; Pounds of cotton spun; Roving wages per score; Rate of

earning per week

                s. d. s. d. 



 1810 400 1 31/2 25 10(1*)

 1811 600 0 10 25 0

 1813 850 0 9 31 101/2

 1823 1000 0 71/2 31 3 



 The same man working at another stretcher, the roving a little

finer, produced, 



 l823 900 0 71/2 28 11/2

 1825 1000 0 7 27 6

 1827 1200 0 6 30 0

 1832 1200 0 6 30 0 



In this instance, production has gradually increased until, at

the end of twenty-two years, three times as much work is done as

at the commencement, although the manual labour employed remains

the same. The weekly earnings of the workmen have not fluctuated

very much, and appear, on the whole, to have advanced: but it

would be imprudent to push too far reasonings founded upon a

single instance. 

    410. The produce of 480 spindles of 'mule yarn spinning', at

different periods, was as follows: 



Year; Hanks about 40 to the pound; Wages per thousand (s. d.)



1806; 6668; 9 2

1823; 8000; 6 3

1832; 10,000; 3 8



    411. The subjoined view of the state of weaving by hand- and

by power-looms, at Stockport, in the years 1822 and 1832, is

taken from an enumeration of the machines contained in 65

factories, and was collected for the purpose of being given in

evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons. 



                            In 1822   In 1832

 Hand-loom weavers          2800          800    2000 decrease

 Persons using power-looms   657         3059    2402 increase

 Persons to dress the warp    98          388     290 increase

 Total persons employed     3555         4247     692 increase

 Power-looms                1970         9177    8207 increase 



During this period, the number of hand-looms in employment has

diminished to less than one-third, whilst that of power-looms has

increased to more than five times its former amount. The total

number of workmen has increased about one-third; but the amount

of manufactured goods (supposing each power-loom to do only the

work of three hand-looms) is three and a half times as large as

it was before. 

    412. In considering this increase of employment, it must be

admitted, that the two thousand persons thrown out of work are

not exactly of the same class as those called into employment by

the power-looms. A hand-weaver must possess bodily strength,

which is not essential for a person attending a power-loom;

consequently, women and young persons of both sexes, from fifteen

to seventeen years of age, find employment in power-loom

factories. This, however, would be a very limited view of the

employment arising from the introduction of power-looms: the

skill called into action in building the new factories, in

constructing the new machinery, in making the steam-engines to

drive it, and in devising improvements in the structure of the

looms, as well as in regulating the economy of the establishment,

is of a much higher order than that which it had assisted in

superseding; and if we possessed any means of measuring this, it

would probably be found larger in amount. Nor, in this view of

the subject, must we omit the fact, that although hand-looms

would have increased in number if those moved by steam had not

been invented, yet it is the cheapness of the article

manufactured by power-looms which has caused this great extension

of their employment, and that by diminishing the price of one

article of commerce, we always call into additional activity the

energy of those who produce others. It appears that the number of

hand-looms in use in England and Scotland in 1830, was about

240,000; nearly the same number existed in the year 1820: whereas

the number of power-looms which, in 1830, was 55,000, had, in

1820, been 14,000. When it is considered that each of these

powerlooms did as much work as three worked by hand, the

increased producing power was equal to that of 123,000

hand-looms. During the whole of this period the wages and

employment of hand-loom weavers have been very precarious. 

    413. Increased intelligence amongst the working classes, may

enable them to foresee some of those improvements which are

likely for a time to affect the value of their labour; and the

assistance of savings banks and friendly societies, (the

advantages of which can never be too frequently, or too strongly,

pressed upon their attention), may be of some avail in remedying

the evil: but it may be useful also to suggest to them, that a

diversity of employments amongst the members of one family will

tend, in some measure, to mitigate the privations which arise

from fluctuation in the value of labour. 



NOTES:



1. In 1810. the workman's wages were guaranteed not to be less

than 26s.





Chapter 33



On the Effect of Taxes and of Legal Restrictions upon

Manufactures



    414. As soon as a tax is put upon any article, the ingenuity

of those who make, and of those who use it, is directed to the

means of evading as large a part of the tax as they can; and this

may often be accomplished in ways which are perfectly fair and

legal. An excise duty exists at present of 3d.(1*) per pound upon

all writing paper. The effect of this impost is, that much of the

paper which is employed, is made extremely thin, in order that

the weight of a given number of sheets may be as small as

possible. Soon after the first imposition of the tax upon

windows, which depended upon their number, and not upon their

size, new-built houses began to have fewer windows and those of

larger dimensions than before. Staircases were lighted by

extremely long windows, illuminating three or four flights of

stairs. When the tax was increased, and the size of windows

charged as single was limited, then still greater care was taken

to have as few windows as possible, and internal lights became

frequent. These internal lights in their turn became the subject

of taxation; but it was easy to evade the discovery of them, and

in the last Act of Parliament reducing the assessed taxes, they

ceased to be chargeable. From the changes thus successively

introduced in the number the forms, and the positions of the

windows, a tolerable conjecture might, in some instances, be

formed of the age of a house. 

    415. A tax on windows is exposed to objection on the double

ground of its excluding air and light, and it is on both accounts

injurious to health. The importance of light to the enjoyment of

health is not perhaps sufficiently appreciated: in the cold and

more variable climates, it is of still greater importance than in

warmer countries. 

    416. The effects of regulations of excise upon our home

manufactures are often productive of great inconvenience; and

check, materially, the natural progress of improvement. It is

frequently necessary, for the purposes of revenue, to oblige

manufacturers to take out a license, and to compel them to work

according to certain rules, and to make certain stated quantities

at each operation. When these quantities are large, as in general

they are, they deter manufacturers from making experiments, and

thus impede improvements both in the mode of conducting the

processes and in the introduction of new materials. Difficulties

of this nature have occurred in experimenting upon glass for

optical purposes; but in this case, permission has been obtained

by fit persons to make experiments, without the interference of

the excise. It ought, however, to be remembered, that such

permission, if frequently or indiscriminately granted, might be

abused: the greatest protection against such an abuse will be

found, in bringing the force of public opinion to bear upon

scientific men and thus enabling the proper authorities, although

themselves but moderately conversant with science, to judge of

the propriety of the permission, from the public character of the

applicant. 

    417. From the evidence given, in 1808, before the Committee

of the House of Commons, On Distillation from Sugar and Molasses,

it appeared that, by a different mode of working from that

prescribed by the Excise, the spirits from a given weight of

corn, which then produced eighteen gallons, might easily have

been increased to twenty gallons. Nothing more is required for

this purpose, than to make what is called the wash weaker. the

consequence of which is, that fermentation goes on to a greater

extent. It was stated, however, that such a deviation would

render the collection of the duty liable to great difficulties;

and that it would not benefit the distiller much, since his price

was enhanced to the customer by any increase of expense in the

fabrication. Here then is a case in which a quantity, amounting

to one-ninth of the total produce, is actually lost to the

country. A similar effect arises in the coal trade, from the

effect of a, duty. for, according to the evidence before the

House of Commons, it appears that a considerable quantity of the

very best coal is actually wasted. The extent of this waste is

very various in different mines; but in some cases it amounts to

one-third. 

    418. The effects of duties upon the import of foreign

manufactures are equally curious. A singular instance occurred in

the United States, where bar-iron was, on its introduction.

liable to a duty of 140 per cent ad valorem, whilst hardware was

charged at 25 per cent only. In consequence of this tax, large

quantities of malleable iron rails for railroads were imported

into America under the denomination of hardware; the difference

of 115 per cent in duty more than counter balancing the expense

of fashioning the iron into rails prior to its importation. 

    419. Duties, drawbacks, and bounties, when considerable in

amount, are all liable to objections of a very serious nature,

from the frauds to which they give rise. It has been stated

before Committees of the House of Commons, that calicoes made up

in the form, and with the appearance of linen, have frequently

been exported for the purpose of obtaining the bounty.. for

calico made up in this way sells only at 1s. 4d. per yard,

whereas linen of equal fineness is worth from 2s. 8d. to 2s. 10d.

per yard. It appeared from the evidence, that one house in six

months sold five hundred such pieces of calico. 

    In almost all cases heavy duties, or prohibitions, are

ineffective as well as injurious; for unless the articles

excluded are of very large dimensions, there constantly arises a

price at which they will be clandestinely imported by the

smuggler. The extent, therefore, to which smuggling can be

carried, should always be considered in the imposition of new

duties, or in the alteration of old ones. Unfortunately it has

been pushed so far, and is so systematically conducted between

this country and France, that the price per cent at which most

contraband articles can be procured is perfectly well known. From

the evidence of Mr Galloway, it appears that, from 30 to 40 per

cent was the rate of insurance on exporting prohibited machinery

from England, and that the larger the quantity the less was the

percentage demanded. From evidence given in the Report of the

Watch and Clock-makers' Committee, in l817, it appears that

persons were constantly in the habit of receiving in France

watches, lace, silks, and other articles of value easily

portable, and delivering them in England at ten per cent on their

estimated worth, in which sum the cost of transport and the risk

of smuggling were included. 

    420. The process employed in manufacturing often depends upon

the mode in which a tax is levied on the materials, or on the

article produced. W atch glasses are made in England by workmen

who purchase from the glass house globes of five or six inches in

diameter, out of which, by means of a piece of red-hot tobacco

pipe, guided round a pattern watch glass placed on the globe,

they crack five others: these are afterwards ground and smoothed

on the edges. In the Tyrol the rough watch glasses are supplied

at once from the glass house; the workman, applying a thick ring

of cold glass to each globe as soon as it is blown, causes a

piece, of the size of a watch glass, to be cracked out. The

remaining portion of the globe is immediately broken, and returns

to the melting pot. This process could not be adopted in England

with the same economy, because the whole of the glass taken out

of the pot is subject to the excise duty. 

    421. The objections thus stated as incidental to particular

modes of taxation are not raised with a view to the removal of

those particular taxes; their fitness or unfitness must be

decided by a much wider enquiry, into which it is not the object

of this volume to enter. Taxes are essential for the security

both of liberty and property, and the evils which have been

mentioned may be the least amongst those which might have been

chosen. It is, however, important that the various effects of

every tax should be studied, and that those should be adopted

which, upon the whole, are found to give the least check to the

productive industry of the country. 

    422. In enquiring into the effect produced, or to be

apprehended from any particular mode of taxation, it is necessary

to examine a little into the interests of the parties who approve

of the plan in question, as well as of those who object to it.

Instances have occurred where the persons paying a tax into the

hands of government have themselves been adverse to any

reduction. This happened in the case of one class of

calico-printers, whose interest really was injured by a removal

of the tax on the printing: they received from the manufacturers,

payment for the duty, about two months before they were

themselves called on to pay it to government; and the consequence

was, that a considerable capital always remained in their hands.

The evidence which states this circumstance is well calculated to

promote a reasonable circumspection in such enquiries. 



    Question. Do you happen to know anything of an opposition

from calicoprinters to the repeal of the tax on printed calicoes?



    Answer. I have certainly heard of such an opposition, and am

not surprised at it. There are very few individuals who are, in

fact, interested in the nonrepeal of the tax; there are two

classes of calico-printers; one, who print their own cloth, send

their goods into the market. and sell them on their own account;

they frequently advance the duty to government, and pay it in

cash before their goods are sold, but generally before the goods

are paid for, being most commonly sold on a credit of six months:

they are of course interested on that account. as well as on

others that have been stated. in the repeal of the tax. The other

class of calico-printers print the cloth of other people; they

print for hire, and on re-delivery of the cloth when printed,

they receive the amount of the duty, which they are not called

upon to pay to government sooner, on an average, than nine weeks

from the stamping of the goods. Where the business is carried on

upon a large scale, the arrears of duty due to government often

amount to eight, or even ten thousand pounds, and furnish a

capital with which these gentlemen carry on their business; it is

not, therefore, to be wondered at that. they should be opposed to

the prayer of our petition. 

    423. The policy of giving bounties upon home productions, and

of enforcing restrictions against those which can be produced

more cheaply in other countries, is of a very questionable

nature: and, except for the purpose of introducing a new

manufacture, in a country where there is not much commercial or

manufacturing spirit, is scarcely to be defended. All incidental

modes of taxing one class of the community, the consumers, to an

unknown extent, for the sake of supporting another class, the

manufacturers, who would otherwise abandon that mode of employing

their capital, are highly objectionable. One part of the price of

any article produced under such circumstances, consists of the

expenditure, together with the ordinary profits of capital: the

other part of its price may be looked upon as charity, given to

induce the manufacturer to continue an unprofitable use of his

capital, in order to give employment to his workmen. If the sum

of what the consumers are thus forced to pay, merely on account

of these artificial restrictions, where generally known, its

amount would astonish even those who advocate them; and it would

be evident to both parties, that the employment of capital in

those branches of trade ought to be abandoned. 

    424. The restriction of articles produced in a manufactory to

certain sizes, is attended with some good effect in an economical

view, arising chiefly from the smaller number of different tools

required in making them, as well as from less frequent change in

the adjustment of those tools. A similar source of economy is

employed in the Navy: by having ships divided into a certain

number of classes, each of which comprises vessels of the same

dimensions. the rigging made for one vessel will fit any other of

its class; a circumstance which renders the supply of distant

stations more easy. 

    425. The effects of the removal of a monopoly are often very

important, and they were perhaps never more remarkable than in

the bobbin net trade. in the years 1824 and 1825. These effects

were, however, considerably enhanced by the general rage for

speculation which was so prevalent during that singular period.

One of the patents of Mr Heathcote for a bobbin net machine had

just then expired, whilst another, for an improvement in a

particular part of such machines, called a turn again, had yet a

few years to run. Many licenses had been granted to use the

former patent, which were charged at the rate of about five

pounds per annum for each quarter of a yard in width, so that

what is termed a six-quarter frame (which makes bobbin net a yard

and a half wide) paid thirty pounds a year. The second patent was

ultimately abandoned in August, 1823, infringements of it having

taken place. 

    It was not surprising that, on the removal of the monopoly

arising from this patent, a multitude of persons became desirous

of embarking in a trade which had hitherto yielded a very large

profit. The bobbin net machine occupies little space; and is,

from that circumstance, well adapted for a domestic manufacture.

The machines which already existed, were principally in the hands

of the manufacturers; but, a kind of mania for obtaining them

seized on persons of all descriptions, who could raise a small

capital; and, under its influence, butchers, bakers, small

farmers, publicans, gentlemen's servants, and, in some cases,

even clergymen, became anxious to possess bobbin net machines. 

    Some few machines were rented; but, in most of these cases,

the workman purchased the machine he employed, by instalments of

from *3 to *6 weekly, for a six quarter machine; and many

individuals, unacquainted with the mode of using the machines so

purchased, paid others of more experience for instructing them in

their use; *50 or *60 being sometimes given for this instruction.

The success of the first speculators induced others to follow the

example; and the machine-makers were almost overwhelmed with

orders for lace frames. Such was the desire to procure them, that

many persons deposited a large part, or the whole, of the price,.

in the hands of the frame-makers. in order to insure their having

the earliest supply. This, as might naturally be expected, raised

the price of wages amongst the workmen employed in

machine-making; and the effect was felt at a considerable

distance from Nottingham, which was the centre of this mania.

Smiths not used to flat filing, coming from distant parts. earned

from 30s. to 42s. per week. Finishing smiths, accustomed to the

work, gained from *3 to *4 per week..The forging smith, if

accustomed to his work. gained from *5 to *6 per week, and some

few earned *10 per week. In making what are technically called

insides, those who were best paid, were generally clock- and

watchmakers, from all the districts round, who received from *3

to *4 per week. The setters-up - persons who put the parts of the

machine together - charged *20 for their assistance; and, a six

quarter machine, could be put together in a fortnight or three

weeks. 

    426. Good workmen, being thus induced to desert less

profitable branches of their business, in order to supply this

extraordinary demand, the masters, in other trades, soon found

their men leaving them, without being aware of the immediate

reason: some of the more intelligent, however, ascertained the

cause. They went from Birmingham to Nottingham, in order to

examine into the circumstances which had seduced almost all the

journeymen clockmakers from their own workshops; and it was soon

apparent, that the men who had been working as clockmakers in

Birmingham, at the rate of 25s. a week, could earn *2 by working

at lace frame-making in Nottingham. 

    On examining the nature of this profitable work, the master

clockmakers perceived that one part of the bobbin net machines,

that which held the bobbins, could easily be made in their own

workshops. They therefore contracted with the machine-makers, who

had already more work ordered than they could execute, to supply

the bobbin carriers, at a price which enabled them, on their

return home, to give such increased wages as were sufficient to

retain their own workmen, as well as yield themselves a good

profit. Thus an additional facility was afforded for the

construction of these bobbin net machines: and the conclusion was

not difficult to be foreseen. The immense supply of bobbin net

thus poured into the market, speedily reduced its price; this

reduction in price, rendered the machines by which the net was

made, less valuable; some few of the earliest producers, for a

short time, carried on a profitable trade; but multitudes were

disappointed, and many ruined. The low price at which the fabric

sold, together with its lightness and beauty, combined to extend

the sale; and ultimately, new improvements in the machines,

rendered the older ones still less valuable. 

    427. The bobbin net trade is, at present, both extensive and

increasing; and, as it may, probably, claim a larger portion of

public attention at some future time, it will be interesting to

describe briefly its actual state. 

    A lace frame on the most improved principle, at the present

day, manufacturing a piece of net two yards wide, when worked

night and day, will produce six hundred and twenty racks per

week. A rack is two hundred and forty holes; and as in the

machine to which we refer, three racks are equal in length to one

yard, it will produce 21,493 square yards of bobbin net annually.

Three men keep this machine constantly working; and, they were

paid (by piece-work) about 25s. each per week, in 1830. Two boys,

working only in the day-time, can prepare the bobbins for this

machine, and are paid from 2s. to 4s. per week, according to

their skill. Forty-six square yards of this net weigh two pounds

three ounces; so that each square yard weighs a little more than

three-quarters of an ounce. 

    428. For a condensed and general view of the present state of

this trade, we shall avail ourselves of a statement by Mr William

Felkin, of Nottingham, dated September, 1831, and entitled Facts

and Calculations illustrative of the Present State of the Bobbin

Net Trade. It appears to have been collected with care, and

contains, in a single sheet of paper, a body of facts of the

greatest importance. *

    429. The total capital employed in the factories, for

preparing the cotton, in those for weaving the bobbin net, and in

various processes to. which it is subject, is estimated at above

*2,000,000, and the number of persons who receive wages, at above

two hundred thousand. 



 Comparison of the value of the raw material imported, with the

value of the goods manufactured therefrom 



Amount of Sea Island cotton annually used 1,600,000 lbs., value

*120,000; this is manufactured into yarn, weighing 1,000,000

lbs., value *500,000. 

    There is also used 25,000 lbs. of raw silk, which costs

*30,000, and is doubled into 10,000 lbs. thrown, worth *40,000. 



Raw Material; Manufacture; Square yards produced; Value per sq.

yd.(s. d.); Total value (*)



Cotton 1,600,000; lbs; Power Net;  6,750,000; 1 3; 421,875

                       Hand ditto; 15,750,000; 1 9; 1,378,125

                       Fancy ditto; 150,000; 3 6; 26,250

Silk, 25,000 lbs;     Silk Goods; 750,000; 1 9; 65,625



                                 23,400,000; 1,89l,875






* I cannot omit the opportunity of expressing my hope that this

example will be followed in other trades. We should thus obtain a

body ofinformation equally important to the workman, the

capitalist. the philosopher. and the statesman.





    The brown nets which are sold in the Nottingham market. are

in part disposed of by the agents of twelve or fifteen of the

larger makers, i.e. to the amount of about *250,000 a year. The

principal part of the remainder, i.e. about *1,050,000 a year, is

sold by about two hundred agents, who take the goods from one

warehouse to another for sale. 

    Of this production, about half is exported in the

unembroidered state. The exports of bobbin net are in great part

to Hamburgh, for sale at home and at Leipzic and Frankfort fairs.

Antwerp, and the rest of Belgium; to France, by contraband; to

Italy, and North and South America. Though a very suitable

article, yet the quantity sent eastward of the Cape of Good Hope,

has hitherto been too trifling for notice. Three-eighths of the

whole production are sold unembroidered at home. The remaining

one-eighth is embroidered in this country. and increases the

ultimate value as under, viz. 



 Embroidery     Increases value     Ultimate worth

                    *                      *

 On power net     131,840               553,715

 On hand net    1,205,860             2,583.985

 On fancy net      78,750               105,000

 On silk net      109,375               175,000 



 Total embroidery, wages and profits 1,525,825

 Ultimate total value 3,417,700



    From this it appears, that in the operations of this trade,

which had no existence twenty years ago, l20,000 original cost

of cotton becomes, when manufactured, of the ultimate value of

*3,242,700 sterling. 

    As to weekly wages paid, I hazard the following as the

judgement of those conversant with the respective branches. viz. 

    In fine spinning and doubling, adults 25s.; children 7s.:

work twelve hours per day. 

    In bobbin net making; men working machines, 18s.;

apprentices, youths of fifteen or more, 10s.; by power, fifteen

hours; by hand, eight to twelve hours, according to width. 

    In mending; children 4s.; women 8s.; work nine to fourteen

hours. ad libitum.

    In winding, threading, etc., children and young women, 5s.:

irregular work, according to the progress of machines. 

    In embroidery; children seven years old and upwards, 1s. to

3s.; work ten to twelve hours; women, if regularly at work, 5s.

to 7s. 6d.; twelve to fourteen hours. 

    As an example of the effect of the wages of lace embroiderv,

etc., it may be observed, it is often the case that a stocking

weaver in a country village will earn only 7s. a week. and his

wife and children 7s. to 14s. more at the embroiderv frame. 

    430. The principal part of the hand-machines employed in the

bobbin net manufacture are worked in shops, forming part of, or

attached to, private houses. The subjoined list will show the

kinds of machinery employed, and classes of persons to whom it

belongs. 



 Bobbin net machinery now at work in the Kingdom



 Hand levers 6 quarter 500      Hand circulars 6 quarter 100

             7 quarter 200                     7 quarter 300

             8 quarter 300                     8 quarter 400

            10 quarter 300                     9 quarter 100

            12 quarter  30                    10 quarter 300

            16 quarter  20                    12 quarter 100

            20 quarter   1   Hand transverse, pusher,

 Hand rotary 10 quarter 50  straight bolt, etc. averaging 5

quarters 750

             12 quarter 50

                      2050                               1451



 Total hand machines 3501



 Power     6 quarter 100

           7 quarter  40

           8 quarter 350

          10 quarter 270

          12 quarter 220

          16 quarter  20

Total power machines 1000



Total number of machines 4501



 700 persons own 1 machine, 700 machines.

 226             2          452

 181             3          543

  96             4          384

  40             5          200

  21             6          126

  17             7          119

  19             8          152

  17             9          153

  12            10          120

   8            11           88

   6            12           72

   5            13           65

   5            14           70

   4            16           64

  25 own respectively 18,

            19,  20,  21,

            23,  24,  25,

            26,  27,  28,

            29,  30,  32,

            33,  35,  36,

            37,  50,  60,

            68,  70,  75,

            95, 105, 206

                            1192 



Number of owners of machines - 1382 Holding together 4500

machines.



The hand workmen consist of the above-named owners 1000

And of journeymen and apprentices        4000 

                                         5000



 These machines are distributed as follows

 Nottingham 1240

 New Radford 140

 Old Radford and Bloomsgrove 240

 Ison Green 160

 Beeston and Chilwell 130

 New and Old Snenton 180

 Derby and its vicinity 185

 Loughborough and its vicinity 385

 Leicester 95

 Mansfield 85

 Tiverton 220

 Barnstable l80

 Chard 190

 Isle of Wight 80

 In sundry other places 990 



                     4500



    Of the above owners, one thousand work in their own machines,

and enter into the class of journeymen as well as that of masters

in operating on the rate of wages. If they reduce the price of

their goods in the market, they reduce their own wages first;

and, of course, eventually the rate of wages throughout the

trade. It is a very lamentable fact, that one-half. or more. of

the one thousand one hundred persons specified in the list as

owning one. two. and three machines, have been compelled to

mortgage their machines for more than their worth in the market,

and are in many cases totally insolvent. Their machines are

principally narrow and making short pieces, while the absurd

system of bleaching at so much a piece goods of all lengths and

widths, and dressing at so much all widths, has caused the new

machines to be all wide, and capable of producing long pieces; of

course to the serious disadvantage, if not utter ruin, of the

small owner of narrow machines. 

    It has been observed above, that wages have been reduced, say

25 per cent in the last two years, or from 24s. to 18s. a week.

Machines have increased in the same time one-eighth in number, or

from four thousand to four thousand five hundred, and one-sixth

in capacity of production. It is deserving the serious notice of

all proprietors of existing machines, that machines are now

introducing into the trade of such power of production as must

still more than ever depreciate (in the absence of an immensely

increased demand) the value of their property. 



    431. From this abstract, we may form some judgement of the

importance of the bobbin net trade. But the extent to which it

bids fair to be carried in future, when the eastern markets shall

be more open to our industry, may be conjectured from the fact

which Mr Felkin subsequently states that 'We can export a durable

and elegant article in cotton bobbin net, at 4d. per square yard,

proper for certain useful and ornamental purposes, as curtains,

etc.; and another article used for many purposes in female dress

at 6d. the square yard.'

    432. Of patents. In order to encourage the invention, the

improvement, or the importation of machines, and of discoveries

relating to manufactures, it has been the practice in many

countries, to grant to the inventors or first introducers, an

exclusive privilege for a term of years. Such monopolies are

termed patents; and they are granted, on the payment of certain

fees, for different periods, from five to twenty years. 

    The following table, compiled from the Report of the

Committee of the House of Commons on Patents, 1829, shows the

expense and duration of patents in various countries: 



Countries; Expense (* s. d.); Term of years; Number granted in

six years, ending in 1826.(Rep. p. 243.)



England; 120 0 0; 14; 914

Ireland; 125 0 0; 14;

Scotland; 100 0 0; 14;

America; 6 15 0; 14;

France; 12 0 0; 5;

        32 0 0; 10;

        60 0 0; 15; 1091

Netherlands; *6 to *30; 5, 10. 15

Austria; 42 10 0; 15; 1099

Spain(3*) Inventor; 20 9 4; 15;

          Improver; 12 5 7; 10;

          Importer; 10 4 8;  6;



    433. It is clearly of importance to preserve to each inventor

the sole use of his invention, until he shall have been amply

repaid for the risk and expense to which he has been exposed, as

well as for the talent he has exerted in completing it. But, the

degrees of merit are so various, and the difficulties of

legislating upon the subject so great, that it has been found

almost impossible to frame a law which shall not, practically, be

open to the most serious objections. 

    The difficulty of defending an English patent in any judicial

trial, is very great; and the number of instances on record in

which the defence has succeeded, are comparatively few. This

circumstance has induced some manufacturers, no longer to regard

a patent as a privilege by which a monopoly price may be secured:

but they sell the patent article at such a price, as will merely

produce the ordinary profits of capital; and thus secure to

themselves the fabrication of it, because no competitors can

derive a profit from invading a patent so exercised. 

    434. The law of copyright, is, in some measure, allied to

that of patents; and it is curious to observe, that those species

of property which require the highest talent, and the greatest

cultivation - which are, more than any other, the pure creations

of mind - should have been the latest to be recognized by the

State. Fortunately, the means of deciding on an infringement of

property in regard to a literary production, are not verv

difficult; but the present laws are, in some cases, productive of

considerable hardship, as well as of impediment to the

advancement of knowledge. 

    435. Whilst discussing the general expediency of limitations

and restrictions. it may be desirable to point out one which

seems to promise advantage, though by no means free from grave

objections. The question of permitting by law, the existence of

partnerships in which the responsibility of one or more of the

partners is limited in amount, is peculiarly important in a

manufacturing, as well as a commercial point of view. In the

former light, it appears calculated to aid that division of

labour, which we have already proved to be as advantageous in

mental as it is in bodily operations; and it might possibly give

rise to a more advantageous distribution of talent, and its

combinations, than at present exists. There are in this country,

many persons possessed of moderate capital. who do not

themselves. enjoy the power of invention in the mechanical and

chemical arts, but who are tolerable judges of such inventions,

and excellent judges of human character. Such persons might, with

great success, employ themselves in finding out inventive

workmen, whose want of capital prevents them from realizing their

projects. If they could enter into a limited partnership with

persons so circumstanced, they might restrain within proper

bounds the imagination of the inventor, and by supplying capital

to judicious schemes, render a service to the country, and secure

a profit for themselves. 

    436. Amongst the restrictions intended for the general

benefit of our manufacturers, there existed a few years ago one

by which workmen were forbidden to go out of the country. A law

so completely at variance with everv principle of liberty, ought

never to have been enacted. It was not, however. until experience

had convinced the legislature of its inefficiency. that it was

repealed. * When, after the last war, the renewed intercourse

between England and the Continent became extensive, it was soon

found that it was impossible to discover the various disguises

which the workmen could assume; and the effect of the law was

rather, by the fear of punishment, to deter those who had left

the country from returning, than to check their disposition to

migrate. 

    436. (4*) The principle, that government Ought to interfere

as little as possible between workmen and their employers, is so

well established, that it is important to guard against its

misapplication. It is not inconsistent with this principle to

insist on the workmen being paid in money - for this is merely to

protect them from being deceived; and still less is it a

deviation from it to limit the number of hours during which

children shall work in factories, or the age at which they shall

commence that species of labour - for they are not free agents,

nor are they capable of judging, if they were; and both policy

and humanity concur in demanding for them some legislative

protection. In both cases it is as right and politic to protect

the weaker party from fraud or force, as it would be impolitic

and unjust to interfere with the amount of the wages of either.



NOTES:



1. Twenty eight shillings per cwt for the finer, twenty one

shillings per cwt for the coarser papers.



2. I cannot omit the opportunity of expressing my hope that this

example will be followed in other trades. We should thus obtain a

body of information equally important to the workman, the

capitalist, the philosopher, and the stateman.



3. The expense of a patent in Spain is stated in the report to be

respecitivly 2000, 1200 and 1000 reals. If these are reals of

vellon, in which accounts are usually kept at Madrid, the above

sums are correct; but if they are reals of plate, the above sums

ought to be nearly doubled.



4. In the year 1824 the law against workmen going abroad, as well

as the laws preventing them from combining, were repealed, after

the fullest enquiry by a Committee of the House of Commons. In

1825 an attempt to re-enact some of the most objectionable was

made, but it failed.





Chapter 34



On the Exportation of Machinery



    437. A few years only have elapsed, since our workmen were

not merely prohibited by Act of Parliament from transporting

themselves to countries in which their industry would produce for

them higher wages, but were forbidden to export the greater part

of the machinery which they were employed to manufacture at home.

The reason assigned for this prohibition was, the apprehension

that foreigners might av ail themselves of our improved

machinery, and thus compete with our manufacturers. It was, in

fact, a sacrifice of the interests of one class of persons, the

makers of machinery, for the imagined benefit of another class,

those who use it. Now, independently of the impolicy of

interfering, without necessity, between these two classes, it may

be observed, that the first class, or the makers of machinery,

are, as a body, far more intelligent than those who only use it;

and though, at present, they are not nearly so numerous, yet,

when the removal of the prohibition which cramps their ingenuity

shall have had time to operate, there appears good reason to

believe, that their number will be greatly increased, and may, in

time, even surpass that of those who use machinery.

    438. The advocates of these prohibitions in England seem to

rely greatly upon the possibility of preventing the knowledge of

new contrivances from being conveyed to other countries; and they

take much too limited a view of the possible, and even probable,

improvements in mechanics. 

    439. For the purpose of examining this question, let us

consider the case of two manufacturers of the same article, one

situated in a country in which labour is very cheap, the

machinery bad, and the modes of transport slow and expensive; the

other engaged in manufacturing in a country in which the price of

labour is very high, the machinery excellent, and the means of

transport expeditious and economical. Let them both send their

produce to the same market, and let each receive such a price as

shall give to him the profit ordinarily produced by capital in

his own country. It is almost certain that in such circumstances

the first improvement in machinery will occur in the country

which is most advanced in civilization; because, even admitting

that the ingenuity to contrive were the same in the two

countries, the means of execution are very different. The effect

of improved machinery in the rich country will be perceived in

the common market, by a small fall in the price of the

manufactured article. This will be the first intimation to the

manufacturer of the poor country, who will endeavour to meet the

diminution in the selling price of his article by increased

industry and economy in his factory,. but he will soon find that

this remedy is temporary, and that the market-price continues to

fall. He will thus be induced to examine the rival fabric, in

order to detect, from its structure, any improved mode of making

it. If, as would most usually happen, he should be unsuccessful

in this attempt, he must endeavour to contrive improvements in

his own machinery, or to acquire information respecting those

which have been made in the factories of the richer country.

Perhaps after an ineffectual attempt to obtain by letters the

information he requires, he sets out to visit in person the

factories of his competitors. To a foreigner and rival

manufacturer such establishments are not easily accessible. and

the more recent the improvements, the less likely he will be to

gain access to them. His next step, therefore, will be to obtain

the knowledge he is in search of from the workmen employed in

using or making the machines. Without drawings, or an examination

of the machines themselves, this process will be slow and

tedious; and he will be liable, after all, to be deceived by

artful and designing workmen, and be exposed to many chances of

failure. But suppose he returns to his own country with perfect

drawings and instructions, he must then begin to construct his

improved machines: and these he cannot execute either so cheaply

or so well as his rivals in the richer countries. But after the

lapse of some time, we shall suppose the machines thus

laboriously improved, to be at last completed, and in working

order. 

    440. Let us now consider what will have occurred to the

manufacturer in the rich country. He will, in the first instance,

have realized a profit by supplying the home market, at the usual

price, with an article which it costs him less to produce; he

will then reduce the price both in the home and foreign market,

in order to produce a more extended sale. It is in this stage

that the manufacturer in the poor country first feels the effect

of the competition; and if we suppose only two or three years to

elapse between the first application of the new improvement in

the rich country, and the commencement of its employment in the

poor country, yet will the manufacturer who contrived the

improvement (even supposing that during the whole of this time he

has made only one step) have realized so large a portion of the

outlay which it required, that he can afford to make a much

greater reduction in the price of his produce, and thus to render

the gains of his rivals quite inferior to his own. 

    441. It is contended that by admitting the exportation of

machinery, foreign manufacturers will be supplied with machines

equal to our own. The first answer which presents itself to this

argument is supplied by almost the whole of the present volume;

That in order to succeed in a manufacture, it is necessary not

merely to possess good machinery, but that the domestic economy

of the factory should be most carefully regulated. 

    The truth, as well as the importance of this principle, is so

well established in the Report of a Committee of the House of

Commons 'On the Export of Tools and Machinery', that I shall

avail myself of the opinions and evidence there stated, before I

offer any observations of my own: 



    Supposing, indeed, that the same machinery which is used in

England could be obtained on the Continent, it is the opinion of

some of the most intelligent of the witnesses that a want of

arrangement in foreign manufactories, of division of labour in

their work, of skill and perseverance in their workmen, and of

enterprise in the masters, together with the comparatively low

estimation in which the master manufacturers are held on the

Continent, and with the comparative want of capital, and of many

other advantageous circumstances detailed in the evidence, would

prevent foreigners from interfering in any great degree by

competition with our principal manufacturers; on which subject

the Committee submit the following evidence as worthy the

attention of the House: 

    I would ask whether, upon the whole, you consider any danger

likely to arise to our manufactures from competition, even if the

French were supplied with machinery equally good and cheap as our

own? They will always be behind us until their general habits

approximate to ours; and they must be behind us for many reasons

that I have before given. 

    Why must they be behind us? One other reason is, that a

cotton manufacturer who left Manchester seven years ago, would be

driven out of the market by the men who are now living in it,

provided his knowledge had not kept pace with those who have been

during that time constantly profiting by the progressive

improvements that have taken place in that period: this

progressive knowledge and experience is our great power and

advantage. 

    It should also be observed, that the constant, nay, almost

daily, improvements which take place in our machinery itself. as

well as in the mode of its application, require that all those

means and advantages alluded to above. should be in constant

operation: and that. in the opinion of several. of the witnesses.

although Europe were possessed of every tool now used in the

United Kingdom, along with the assistance of English artisans,

which she may have in any number, yet, from the natural and

acquired advantages possessed by this country, the manufacturers

of the United Kingdom would for ages continue to retain the

superiority they now enjoy. It is indeed the opinion of many,

that if the exportation of machinery were permitted, the

exportation would often consist of those tools and machines,

which, although already superseded by new inventions, still

continue to be employed, from want of opportunity to get rid of

them: to the detriment, in many instances, of the trade and

manufactures of the country: and it is matter worthy of

consideration, and fully borne out by the evidence, that by such

increased foreign demand for machinery, the ingenuity and skill

of our workmen would have greater scope; and that, important as

the improvements in machinery have lately been, they might, under

such circumstances, be fairly expected to increase to a degree

beyond all precedent. 

    The many important facilities for the construction of

machines and the manufacturing of commodities which we possess,

are enjoyed by no other country; nor is it likely that any

country can enjoy them to an equal extent for an indefinite

period. It is admitted by everyone, that our skill is unrivalled;

the industry and power of our people unequalled;. their

ingenuity, as displayed in the continuol improvement in

machinery, and production of commodities, without parallel; and

apparently, without limit. The freedom which, under our

government, every man has, to use his capital, his labour, and

his talents, in the manner most conducive to his interests, is an

inestimable advantage; canals are cut, and railroads constructed,

by the voluntary association of persons whose local knowledge

enables them to place them in the most desirable situations; and

these great advantages cannot exist under less free governments.

These circumstances, when taken together, give such a decided

superiority to our people, that no injurious rivalry, either in

the construction of machinery or the manufacture of commodities,

can reasonably be anticipated. 



    442. But, even if it were desirable to prevent the

exportation of a certain class of machinery, it is abdundantly

evident, that, whilst the exportation of other classes is

allowed, it is impossible to prevent the forbidden one from being

smuggled out; and that, in point of fact, the additional risk has

been well calculated by the smuggler. 

    443. It would appear, also, from various circumstances, that

the immediate exportation of improved machinery is not quite so

certain as has been assumed; and that the powerful principle of

self-interest will urge the makers of it, rather to push the sale

in a different direction. When a great maker of machinery has

contrived a new machine for any particular process, or has made

some great improvement upon those in common use, to whom will he

naturally apply for the purpose of selling his new machines?

Undoubtedly, in by far the majority of cases, to his nearest and

best customers, those to whom he has immediate and personal

access, and whose capability to fulfil any contract is best known

to him. With these, he will communicate and offer to take their

orders for the new machine; nor will he think of writing to

foreign customers, so long as he finds the home demand sufficient

to employ the whole force of his establishment. Thus, therefore,

the machine-maker is himself interested in giving the first

advantage of any new improvement to his own countrymen. 

    444. In point of fact, the machine-makers in London greatly

prefer home orders, and do usually charge an additional price to

their foreign customers. Even the measure of this preference may

be found in the evidence before the Committee on the Export of

Machinery. It is differently estimated by various engineers; but

appears to vary from five up to twenty-five per cent on the

amount of the order. The reasons are: 1. If the machinery be

complicated, one of the best workmen, well accustomed to the mode

of work in the factory, must be sent out to put it up; and there

is always a considerable chance of his having offers that will

induce him to remain abroad. 2. If the work be of a more simple

kind, and can be put up without the help of an English workman,

yet for the credit of the house which supplies it, and to prevent

the accidents likely to occur from the want of sufficient

instruction in those who use it, the parts are frequently made

stronger, and examined more attentively, than they would be for

an English purchaser. Any defect or accident also would be

attended with more expense to repair, if it occurred abroad, than

in England. 

    445. The class of workmen who make machinery, possess much

more skill, and are paid much more highly than that class who

merely use it; and, if a free exportation were allowed, the more

valuable class would, undoubtedly, be greatly increased; for,

notwithstanding the high rate of wages, there is no country in

whichit can at this moment be made, either so well or so cheaply

as in England. We might, therefore, supply the whole world with

machinery, at an evident advantage, both to ourselves and our

customers. In Manchester, and the surrounding district, many

thousand men are wholly occupied in making the machinery, which

gives employment to many hundred thousands who use it; but the

period is not very remote, when the whole number of those who

used machines, was not greater than the number of those who at

present manufacture them. Hence, then, if England should ever

become a great exporter of machinery, she would necessarily

contain a large class of workmen, to whom skill would be

indispensable, and, consequently, to whom high wages would be

paid; and although her manufacturers might probably be

comparatively fewer in number, yet they would undoubtedly have

the advantage of being the first to derive profit from

improvement. Under such circumstances, any diminution in the

demand for machinery, would, in the first instance, be felt by a

class much better able to meet it, than that which now suffers

upon every check in the consumption of manufactured goods; and

the resulting misery would therefore assume a mitigated

character. 

    446. It has been feared, that when other countries have

purchased our machines, they will cease to demand new ones: but

the statement which has been given of the usual progress in the

improvement of the machinery employed in any manufacture, and of

the average time which elapses before it is superseded by such

improvements, is a complete reply to this objection. If our

customers abroad did not adopt the new machinery contrived by us

as soon as they could procure it, then our manufacturers would

extend their establishments, and undersell their rivals in their

own markets. 

    447. It may also be urged, that in each kind of machinery a

maximum of perfection may be imagined, beyond which it is

impossible to advance; and certainly the last advances are

usually the smallest when compared with those which precede them:

but it should be observed, that these advances are generally made

when the number of machines in employment is already large; and

when, consequently, their effects on the power of producing are

very considerable. But though it should be admitted that any one

species of machinery may, after a long period, arrive at a degree

of perfection which would render further improvement nearly

hopeless, yet it is impossible to suppose that this can be the

case with respect to all kinds of mechanism. In fact the limit of

improvement is rarely approached, except in extensive branches of

national manufactures; and the number of such branches is, even

at present, very small. 

    448. Another argument in favour of the exportation of

machinery, is, that it would facilitate the transfer of capital

to any more advantageous mode of employment which might present

itself. If the exportation of machinery were permitted, there

would doubtless arise a new and increased demand; and, supposing

any particular branch of our manufactures to cease to produce the

average rate of profit, the loss to the capitalist would be much

less, if a market were open for the sale of his machinery to

customers more favourably circumstanced for its employment. If,

on the other hand, new improvements in machinery should be

imagined, the manufacturer would be more readily enabled to carry

them into effect, by having the foreign market opened where he

could sell his old machines. The fact, that England can,

notwithstanding her taxation and her high rate of wages, actually

undersell other nations, seems to be well established: and it

appears to depend on the superior goodness and cheapness of those

raw materials of machinery the metals - on the excellence of the

tools - and on the admirable arrangements of the domestic economy

of our factories.

    449. The different degrees of facility with which capital can

be transferred from one mode of employment to another, has an

important effect on the rate of profits in different trades and

in different countries. Supposing all the other causes which

influence the rate of profit at any period, to act equally on

capital employed in different occupations, yet the real rates of

profit would soon alter, on account of the different degrees of

loss incurred by removing the capital from one mode of investment

to another, or of any variation in the action of those causes. 

    450. This principle will appear more clearly by taking an

example. Let two capitalists have embarked *10,000 each, in two

trades: A in supplying a district with water, by means of a

steam-engine and iron pipes; B in manufacturing bobbin net. The

capital of A will be expended in building a house and erecting a

steam-engine, which costs, we shall suppose, *3000; and in laying

down iron pipes to supply his customers, costing *7000. The

greatest part of this latter expense is payment for labour. and

if the pipes were to be taken up, the damage ariSing from that

operation would render them of little value, except as old metal;

whilst the expense of their removal would be considerable. Let

us, therefore, suppose, that if A were obliged to give up his

trade, he could realize only *4000 by the sale of his stock. Let

us suppose again that B, by the sale of his bobbin net factory

and machinery, could realize *8000 and let the usual profit on

the capital employed by each party be the same, say 20 per cent:

then we have 



Capital invested; Money which would arise from sale of machinery;

Annual rate of profit per cent; Income



                          *         *    *        *

 Water works            10,000    4000   20     2000

 Bobbin net Factory     10,000    8000   20     2000



    Now, if, from competition, or any other cause, the rate of

profit arising from water-works should fall to 20 per cent, that

circumstance would not cause a transfer of capital from the

water-works to bobbin net making; because the reduced income from

the water-works, *1000 per annum, would still be greater than

that produced by investing *4000, (the whole sum arising from the

sale of the materials of the water-works), in a bobbin net

factory, which sum, at 20 per cent, would yield only *800 per

annum. In fact, the rate of profit, arising from the water-works,

must fall to less than 8 per cent before the proprietor could

increase his income by removing his capital into the bobbin net

trade. 

    451. In any enquiry into the probability of the injury

arising to our manufacturers from the competition of foreign

countries, particular regard should be had to the facilities of

transport, and to the existence in our own country of a mass of

capital in roads, canals, machinery, etc., the greater portion of

which may fairly be considered as having repaid the expense of

its outlay,. and also to the cheap rate at which the abundance of

our fuel enables us to produce iron, the basis of almost all

machinery. It has been justly remarked by M. de Villefosse, in

the memoir before alluded to, that Ce que l'on nomme en France,

la question du prix des fers, est, a proprement parler, la

question du prix des bois, et la question, des moyens de

communications interieures par les routes, fleuves, rivieres et

canaux. 

    The price of iron in various countries in Europe has been

stated in section 215 of the present volume; and it appears, that

in England it is produced at the least expense, and in France at

the greatest. The length of the roads which cover England and

Wales may be estimated roughly at twenty thousand miles of

turnpike, and one hundred thousand miles of road not turnpike.

The internal water communication of England and France, as far as

I have been able to collect information on the subject, may be

stated as follows: 



                    In France



                                          Miles in length



 Navigable rivers                                 4668

 Navigable canals                                  915.5

 Navigable canals in progress of execution (1824) 1388 



                                                  6971.5 (1*)



But, if we reduce these numbers in the proportion of 3.7 to 1,

which is the relative area of France as compared with England and

Wales, then we shall have the following comparison: 



 Portion of France equal in size to England and Wales



                             England(2*)

                               Miles              Miles



 Navigable rivers              1275.5            1261.6

 Tidal navigation(3*)           545.9

 Canals, direct    2023.5

 Canals, branch     150.6 



                   2174.1      2174.1             247.4

 Canals commenced               ---               375.1



                Total          3995.5            1884.1



 Population in 1831        13,894,500          8,608,500 





    This comparison, between the internal communications of the

two countries, is not offered as complete; nor is it a fair view,

to contrast the wealthiest portion of one country with the whole

of the other: but it is inserted with the hope of inducing those

who possess more extensive information on the subject, to supply

the facts on which a better comparison may be instituted. The

information to be added, would consist of the number of miles in

each country, of seacoast, of public roads, of railroads, of

railroads on which locomotive engines are used. 

    452. One point of view, in which rapid modes of conveyance

increase the power of a country, deserves attention. On the

Manchester Railroad, for example, above half a million of persons

travel annually; and supposing each person to save only one hour

in the time of transit, between Manchester and Liverpool, a

saving of five hundred thousand hours, or of fifty thousand

working days, of ten hours each, is effected. Now this is

equivalent to an addition to the actual power of the country of

one hundred and sixty-seven men, without increasing tbe quantity

of food consumed; and it should also be remarked, that the time

of the class of men thus supplied, is far more valuable than that

of mere labourers.



NOTES:



1. This table is extracted and reduced from one of Ravinet,

Dictionnaire Hydrographique. 2 vols. 8vo. Paris. 1824. 



2. I am indebted to F. Page. Esq. of Speen, for that portion of

this table which relates to the internal navigation of England.

Those only who have themselves collected statistical details can

be aware of the expense of time and labour, of which the few

lines it contains are the result. 



3. The tidal navigation includes: the Thames. from the mouth of

the Medway; the Severn. from the Holmes: the Trent. from Trent

Falls in the Humber; the Mersey from Runcorn Gap.





Chapter 35



On the Future Prospects of Manufactures, as Connected with

Science



    453. In reviewing the various processes offered as

illustrations of those general principles which it has been the

main object of the present volume to support and establish, it is

impossible not to perceive that the arts and manufactures of the

country are intimately connected with the progress of the severer

sciences; and that, as we advance in the career of improvement,

every step requires, for its success, that this connection should

be rendered more intimate. 

    The applied sciences derive their facts from experiment; but

the reasonings, on which their chief utility depends, are the

province of what is called abstract science. It has been shown,

that the division of labour is no less applicable to mental

productions than to those in which material bodies are concerned;

and it follows, that the efforts for the improvement of its

manufactures which any country can make with the greatest

probability of success, must arise from the combined exertions of

all those most skilled in the theory, as well as in the practice

of the arts; each labouring in that department for which his

natural capacity and acquired habits have rendered him most fit. 

    454. The profit arising from the successful application to

practice of theoretical principles, will, in most cases, amply

reward, in a pecuniary sense, those by whom they are first

employed; yet even here, what has been stated with respect to

patents, will prove that there is room for considerable amendment

in our legislative enactments: but the discovery of the great

principles of nature demands a mind almost exclusively devoted to

such investigations; and these, in the present state of science,

frequently require costly apparatus, and exact an expense of time

quite incompatible with professional avocations. It becomes,

therefore, a fit subject for consideration, whether it would not

be politic in the State to compensate for some of those

privations, to which the cultivators of the higher departments of

science are exposed; and the best mode of effecting this

compensation, is a question which interests both the philosopher

and the statesman. Such considerations appear to have had their

just influence in other countries, where the pursuit of science

is regarded as a profession, and where those who are successful

in its cultivation are not shut out from almost every object of

honourable ambition to which their fellow countrymen may aspire.

Having, however, already expressed some opinion upon these

subjects in another publication,(1*) I shall here content myself

with referring to that work. 

    455. There was, indeed, in our own country, one single

position to which science, when concurring with independent

fortune, might aspire, as conferring rank and station, an office

deriving, in the estimation of the public, more than half its

value from the commanding knowledge of its possessor; and it is

extraordinary, that even that solitary dignity - that barony by

tenure in the world of British science - the chair of the Royal

Society, should have been coveted for adventitious rank. It is

more extraordinary, that a Prince, distinguished by the liberal

views he has invariably taken of public affairs - and eminent for

his patronage of every institution calculated to alleviate those

miseries from which, by his rank, he is himself exempted - who is

stated by his friends to be the warm admirer of knowledge, and

most anxious for its advancement, should have been so imperfectly

informed by those friends, as to have wrested from the head of

science, the only civic wreath which could adorn its brow.(2*)

    In the meanwhile the President may learn, through the only

medium by which his elevated station admits approach, that those

evils which were anticipated from his election, have not proved

to be imaginary, and that the advantages by some expected to

result from it, have not yet become apparent. It may be right

also to state, that whilst many of the inconveniences, which have

been experienced by the President of the Royal Society, have

resulted from the conduct of his own supporters, those who were

compelled to differ from him, have subsequently offered no

vexatious opposition: they wait in patience, convinced that the

force of truth must ultimately work its certain, though silent

course; not doubting that when His Royal Highness is correctly

informed, he will himself be amongst the first to be influenced

by its power. 

    456. But younger institutions have arisen to supply the

deficiencies of the old; and very recently a new combination,

differing entirely from the older societies, promises to give

additional steadiness to the future march of science. The British

Association for the Advancement of Science, which held its first

meeting at York(3*) in the year 1831, would have acted as a

powerful ally, even if the Royal Society were all that it might

be: but in the present state of that body such an association is

almost necessary for the purposes of science. The periodical

assemblage of persons, pursuing the same or different branches of

knowledge, always produces an excitement which is favourable to

the development of new ideas; whilst the long period of repose

which succeeds, is advantageous for the prosecution of the

reasonings or the experiments then suggested; and the recurrence

of the meeting in the succeeding year, will stimulate the

activity of the enquirer, by the hope of being then enabled to

produce the successful result of his labours. Another advantage

is, that such meetings bring together a much larger number of

persons actively engaged in science, or placed in positions in

which they can contribute to it, than can ever be found at the

ordinary meetings of other institutions, even in the most

populous capitals; and combined effort towards any particular

object can thus be more easily arranged. 

    457. But perhaps the greatest benefit which will accrue from

these assemblies, is the intercourse which they cannot fail to

promote between the different classes of society. The man of

science will derive practical information from the great

manufacturers the chemist will be indebted to the same source for

substances which exist in such minute quantity, as only to become

visible in most extensive operations - and persons of wealth and

property, resident in each neighbourhood visited by these

migratory assemblies, will derive greater advantages than either

of those classes, from the real instruction they may procure

respecting the produce and manufactures of their country, and the

enlightened gratification which is ever attendant on the

acquisition of knowledge.(4*)

    458. Thus it may be hoped that public opinion shall be

brought to bear upon the world of science; and that by this

intercourse light will be thrown upon the characters of men, and

the pretender and the charlatan be driven into merited obscurity.

Without the action of public opinion, any administration, however

anxious to countenance the pursuits of science, and however ready

toreward, by wealth or honours, those whom they might think most

eminent, would run the risk of acting like the blind man recently

couched, who, having no mode of estimating degrees of distance,

mistook the nearest and most insignificant for the largest

objects in nature: it becomes, therefore, doubly important, that

the man of science should mix with the world. 

    459. It is highly probable that in the next generation, the

race of scientific men in England will spring from a class of

persons altogether different from that which has hitherto

scantily supplied them. Requiring, for the success of their

pursuits, previous education, leisure, and fortune, few are so

likely to unite these essentials as the sons of our wealthy

manufacturers, who, having been enriched by their own exertions,

in a field connected with science, will be ambitious of having

their children distinguished in its ranks. It must, however, be

admitted, that this desire in the parents would acquire great

additional intensity, if worldly honours occasionally followed

successful efforts; and that the country would thus gain for

science, talents which are frequently rendered useless by the

unsuitable situations in which they are placed. 

    460. The discoverers of iodine and bromine, two substances

hitherto undecompounded, were both amongst the class of

manufacturers, one being a maker of saltpetre at Paris, the other

a manufacturing chemist at Marseilles; and the inventor of

balloons filled with rarefied air, was a paper manufacturer near

Lyons. The descendants of Mongolfier, the first aerial traveller,

still carry onthe establishment of their progenitor, and combine

great scientific knowledge with skill in various departments of

the arts, to which the different branches of the family have

applied themselves. 

    461. Chemical science may, in many instances, be of great

importance to the manufacturer, as well as to the merchant. The

quantity of Peruvian bark which is imported into Europe is very

considerable; but chemistry has recently proved that a large

portion of the bark itself is useless. The alkali Quinia which

has been extracted from it, possesses all the properties for

which the bark is valuable, and only forty ounces of this

substance, when in combination with sulphuric acid, can be

extracted from a hundred pounds of the bark. In this instance

then, with every ton of useful matter, thirty-nine tons of

rubbish are transported across the Atlantic. 

    The greatest part of the sulphate of quinia now used in this

country is imported from France, where the low price of the

alcohol, by which it is extracted from the bark, renders the

process cheap; but it cannot be doubted, that when more settled

forms of government shall have given security. to capital, and

when advancing civilization shall have spread itself over the

states of Southern America, the alkaline medicine will be

extracted from the woody matter by which its efficacy is

impaired, and that it will be exported in its most condensed

form. 

    462. The aid of chemistry, in extracting and in concentrating

substances used for human food, is of great use in distant

voyages, where the space occupied by the stores must be

economized with the greatest care. Thus the essential oils supply

the voyager with flavour; the concentrated and crystallized

vegetable acids preserve his health; and alcohol, when

sufficiently diluted, supplies the spirit necessary for his daily

consumption. 

    463. When we reflect on the very small number of species of

plants, compared with the multitude that are known to exist,

which have hitherto been cultivated, and rendered useful to man;

and when we apply the same observation to the animal world, and

even to the mineral kingdom, the field that natural science opens

to our view seems to be indeed unlimited. These productions of

nature, varied and innumerable as they are, may each, in some

future day, become the basis of extensive manufactures, and give

life, employment, and wealth, to millions of human beings. But

the crude treasures perpetually exposed before our eyes, contain

within them other and more valuable principles. All these,

likewise, in their numberless combinations, which ages of labour

and research can never exhaust, may be destined to furnish, in

perpetual succession, new sources of our wealth and of our

happiness. Science and knowledge are subject, in their extension

and increase, to laws quite opposite to those which regulate the

material world. Unlike the forces of molecular attraction, which

cease at sensible distances; or that of gravity, which decreases

rapidly with the increasing distance from the point of its

origin; the further we advance from the origin of our knowledge,

the larger it becomes, and the greater power it bestows upon its

cultivators, to add new fields to its dominions. Yet, does this

continually and rapidly increasing power, instead of giving us

any reason to anticipate the exhaustion of so fertile a field,

place us at each advance, on some higher eminence, from which the

mind contemplates the past, and feels irresistibly convinced,

that the whole, already gained, bears a constantly diminishing

ratio to that which is contained within the still more rapidly

expanding horizon of our knowledge. 

    464. But, if the knowledge of the chemical and physical

properties of the bodies which surround us, as well as our

imperfect acquaintance with the less tangible elements, light,

electricity, and heat, which mysteriously modify or change their

combinations, concur to convince us of the same fact; we must

remember that another and a higher science, itself still more

boundless, is also advancing with a giant's stride, and having

grasped the mightier masses of the universe, and reduced their

wanderings to laws, has given to us in its own condensed

language, expressions, which are to the past as history, to the

future as prophecy. It is the same science which is now preparing

its fetters for the minutest atoms that nature has created:

already it has nearly chained the ethereal fluid, and bound in

one harmonious system all the intricate and splendid phenomena of

light. It is the science of calculation - which becomes

continually more necessary at each step of our progress, and

which must ultimately govern the whole of the applications of

science to the arts of life. 

    465. But perhaps a doubt may arise in the mind, whilst

contemplating the continually increasing field of human

knowledge, that the weak arm of man may want the physical force

required to render that knowledge available. The experience of

the past, has stamped with the indelible character of truth, the

maxim, that knowledge is power. It not merely gives to its

votaries control over the mental faculties of their species, but

is itself the generator of physical force. The discovery of the

expansive power of steam, its condensation, and the doctrine of

latent heat, has already added to the population of this small

island, millions of hands. But the source of this power is not

without limit, and the coal-mines of the world may ultimately be

exhausted. Without adverting to the theory, that new deposits of

that mineral are not accumulating under the sea, at the estuaries

of some of our larger rivers; without anticipating the

application of other fluids requiring a less supply of caloric

than water - we may remark that the sea itself offers a perennial

source of power hitherto almost unapplied. The tides, twice in

each day, raise a vast mass of water, which might be made

available for driving machinery. But supposing heat still to

remain necessary, when the exhausted state of our coal fields

renders it expensive: long before that period arrives, other

methods will probably have been invented for producing it. In

some districts, there are springs of hot water, which have flowed

for centuries unchanged in temperature. In many parts of the

island of Ischia, by deepening the sources of the hot springs

only a few feet, the water boils; and there can be little doubt

that, by boring a short distance, steam of high pressure would

issue from the orifice.(5*)

    In Iceland, the sources of heat are still more plentiful; and

their proximity to large masses of ice, seems almost to point out

the future destiny of that island. The ice of its glaciers may

enable its inhabitants to liquefy the gases with the least

expenditure of mechanical force; and the heat of its volcanoes

may supply the power necessary for their condensation. Thus, in a

future age, power may become the staple commodity of the

Icelanders, and of the inhabitants of other volcanic

districts;(6*) and possibly the very process by which they will

procure this article of exchange for the luxuries of happier

climates may, in some measure, tame the tremendous element which

occasionally devastates their provinces. 

    466. Perhaps to the sober eye of inductive philosophy, these

anticipations of the future may appear too faintly connected with

the history of the past. When time shall have revealed the future

progress of our race, those laws which are now obscurely

indicated, will then become distinctly apparent; and it may

possibly be found that the dominion of mind over the material

world advances with an everaccelerating force. 

    Even now, the imprisoned winds which the earliest poet made

the Grecian warrior bear for the protection of his fragile bark;

or those which, in more modern times, the Lapland wizards sold to

the deluded sailors - these, the unreal creations of fancy or of

fraud, called at the command of science, from their shadowy

existence, obey a holier spell: and the unruly masters of the

poet and the seer become the obedient slaves of civilized man. 

    Nor have the wild imaginings of the satirist been quite

unrivalled by the realities of after years: as if in mockery of

the College of Laputa, light almost solar has been extracted from

the refuse of fish; fire has been sifted by the lamp of Davy. and

machinery has been taught arithmetic instead of poetry. 

    467. In whatever light we examine the triumphs and

achievements of our species over the creation submitted to its

power, we explore new sources of wonder. But if science has

called into real existence the visions of the poet - if the

accumulating knowledge of ages has blunted the sharpest and

distanced the loftiest of the shafts of the satirist, the

philosopher has conferred on the moralist an obligation of

surpassing weight. In unveiling to him the living miracles which

teem in rich exuberance around the minutest atom, as well as

throughout the largest masses of ever-active matter, he has

placed before him resistless evidence of immeasurable design.

Surrounded by every form of animate and inanimate existence, the

sun of science has yet penetrated but through the outer fold of

nature's majestic robe; but if the philosopher were required to

separate, from amongst those countless evidences of creative

power, one being, the masterpiece of its skill; and from that

being to select one gift, the choicest of all the attributes of

life; turning within his own breast, and conscious of those

powers which have subjugated to his race the external world, and

of those higher powers by which he has subjugated to himself that

creative faculty which aids his faltering conceptions of a deity,

the humble worshipper at the altar of truth would pronounce that

being, man; that endowment, human reason. 

    But however large the interval that separates the lowest from

the highest of those sentient beings which inhabit our planet,

all the results of observation, enlightened by all the reasonings

of the philosopher, combine to render it probable that, in the

vast extent of creation, the proudest attribute of our race is

but, perchance, the lowest step in the gradation of intellectual

existence. For, since every portion of our own material globe,

and every animated being it supports, afford, on more

scrutinizing enquiry, more perfect evidence of design, it would

indeed be most unphilosophical to believe that those sister

spheres, obedient to the same law, and glowing with light and

heat radiant from the same central source - and that the members

of those kindred systems, almost lost in the remoteness of space,

and perceptible only from the countless multitude of their

congregated globes should each be no more than a floating chaos

of unformed matter; or, being all the work of the same Almighty

Architect, that no living eye should be gladdened by their forms

of beauty, that no intellectual being should expand its faculties

in decyphering their laws. 



NOTES:



1. Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, and on some

of its Causes. 8vo. 1830. Fellowes.



2. The Duke of Sussex was proposed as President of the Royal

Society in opposition to the wish of the Council in opposition to

the public declaration of a body of Fellows, comprising the

largest portion of those by whose labours the character of

English science had been maintained The aristocracy of rank and

of power, aided by such allies as it can always command, set

itself in array against the prouder aristocracy of science. Out

of about seven hundred members. only two hundred and thirty

balloted; and the Duke of Sussex had a majority of eight. Under

such circumstances, it was indeed extraordinary, that His Royal

Highness should have condescended to accept the fruits of that

doubtful and inauspicious victory. 

    The circumstances preceding and attending this singular

contest have been most ably detailed in a pamphlet entitled A

Statement of the Circumstances connected with the late Election

for the, Presidency of the Royal Society, 1831, printed by R.

Taylor, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. The whole tone of the tract

is strikingly contrasted with that of the productions of some of

those persons by whom it was His Royal Highness's misfortune to

be supported. 



3. The second meeting took place at Oxford in June, 1932, and

surpassed even the sanguine anticipations of its friends. The

third annual meeting will take place at Cambridge in June 1833.



4 The advantages likely to arise from such an association, have

been so clearly stated in the address delivered by the Rev. Mr

Vernon Harcourt, at its first meeting, that I would strongly

recommend its perusal by all those who feel interested in the

success of English science. Vide First Report of the British

Association for the Advancement of Science, York. 1832. 



5 In 1828, the author of these pages visited Ischia, with a

committee of the Royal Academy of Naples. deputed to examine the

temperature and chrmical constitution of the springs in that

island. During the few first days, several springs which had been

represented in the instructions as under the boiling temperature,

were found, on deepening the excavations. to rise to the boiiing

point. 



6 See section 351.





End
