




The Economy of Machinery and Manufactures

by Charles Babbage

1832



Section II



On the domestic and political economy of manufactures



Chapter 13



Distinction Between Making and Manufacturing



    163. The economical principles which regulate the application

of machinery, and which govern the interior of all our great

factories, are quite as essential to the prosperity of a great

commercial country, as are those mechanical principles, the

operation of which has been illustrated in the preceding section.

    The first object of every person who attempts to make any

article of consumption, is, or ought to be, to produce it in a

perfect form; but in order to secure to himself the greatest and

most permanent profit, he must endeavour, by every means in his

power, to render the new luxury or want which he has created,

cheap to those who consume it. The larger number of purchasers

thus obtained will, in some measure, secure him from the caprices

of fashion, whilst it furnishes a far greater amount of profit,

although the contribution of each individual is diminished. The

importance of collecting data, for the purpose of enabling the

manufacturer to ascertain how many additional customers he will

acquire by a given reduction in the price of the article he

makes, cannot be too strongly pressed upon the attention of those

who employ themselves in statistical enquiries. In some ranks of

society, no diminution of price can bring forward a great

additional number of customers; whilst, amongst other classes, a

very small reduction will so enlarge the sale, as to yield a

considerable increase of profit. Materials calculated to assist

in forming a table of the numbers of persons who possess incomes

of different amount, occur in the 14th Report of the

Commissioners of Revenue Inquiry., which includes a statement of

the amount of personal property proved at the legacy office

during one year; the number of the various classes of testators;

and an account of the number of persons receiving dividends from

funded property, distributed into classes. Such a table, formed

even approximately, and exhibited in the form of a curve, might

be of service.

    164. A considerable difference exists between the terms

making and manufacturing. The former refers to the production of

a small, the latter to that of a very large number of

individuals; and the difference is well illustrated in the

evidence, given before the Committee of the House of Commons, on

the Export of Tools and Machinery. On that occasion Mr Maudslay

stated, that he had been applied to by the Navy Board to make

iron tanks for ships, and that he was rather unwilling to do so,

as he considered it to be out of his line of business; however,

he undertook to make one as a trial. The holes for the rivets

were punched by hand-punching with presses, and the 1680 holes

which each tank required cost seven shillings. The Navy Board,

who required a large number, proposed that he should supply forty

tanks a week for many months. The magnitude of the order made it

worth his while to commence manufacture, and to make tools for

the express business. Mr Maudslay therefore offered, if the Board

would give him an order for two thousand tanks, to supply them at

the rate of eighty per week. The order was given: he made tools,

by which the expense of punching the rivet-holes of each tank was

reduced from seven shillings to ninepence; he supplied

ninety-eight tanks a week for six months, and the price charged

for each was reduced from seventeen pounds to fifteen.

    165. If, therefore, the maker of an article wish to become a

manufacturer, in the more extended sense of the term, he must

attend to other principles besides those mechanical ones on which

the successful execution of his work depends; and he must

carefully arrange the whole system of his factory in such a

manner, that the article he sells to the public may be produced

at as small a cost as possible. Should he not be actuated at

first by motives so remote, he will, in every highly civilized

country, be compelled, by the powerful stimulus of competition,

to attend to the principles of the domestic economy of

manufactures. At every reduction in price of the commodity he

makes, he will be driven to seek compensation in a saving of

expense in some of the processes; and his ingenuity will be

sharpened in this enquiry by the hope of being able in his turn

to undersell his rivals. The benefit of the improvements thus

engendered is, for a short time, confined to those from whose

ingenuity they derive their origin; but when a sufficient

experience has proved their value, they become generally adopted,

until in their turn they are superseded by other more economical

methods.



Chapter 14



Of Money as a Medium of Exchange



    166. In the earlier stages of societies the interchange of

the few commodities required was conducted by barter. but as soon

as their wants became more varied and extensive, the necessity of

having some common measure of the value of all commodities -

itself capable of subdivision - became apparent: thus money was

introduced. In some countries shells have been employed for this

purpose; but civilized nations have, by common consent, adopted

the precious metals.(1*) The sovereign power has, in most

countries, assumed the right of coining; or, in other words, the

right of stamping with distinguishing marks, pieces of metal

having certain forms and weights and a certain degree of

fineness: the marks becoming a guarantee, to the people amongst

whom the money circulates, that each piece is of the required

weight and quality.

    The expense of manufacturing gold into coin, and that of the

loss arising from wear, as well as of interest on the capital

invested in it, must either be defrayed by the State, or be

compensated by a small reduction in its weight, and is a far less

cost to the nation than the loss of time and inconvenience which

would arise from a system of exchange or barter.

    167. These coins are liable to two inconveniences: they may

be manufactured privately by individuals, of the same quality,

and similarly stamped; or imitations may be made of inferior

metal, or of diminished weight. The first of these inconveniences

would be easily remedied by making the current value of the coin

nearly equal to that of the same weight of the metal; and the

second would be obviated by the caution of individuals in

examining the external characters of each coin, and partly by the

punishment inflicted by the State on the perpetrators of such

frauds.

    168. The subdivisions of money vary in different countries,

and much time may be lost by an inconvenient system of division.

The effect is felt in keeping extensive accounts, and

particularly in calculating the interest on loans, or the

discount upon bills of exchange. The decimal system is the best

adapted to facilitate all such calculations; and it becomes an

interesting question to consider whether our own currency might

not be converted into one decimally divided. The great step, that

of abolishing the guinea, has already been taken without any

inconvenience, and but little is now required to render the

change complete.

    169. If, whenever it becomes necessary to call in the

half-crowns, a new coin of the value of two shillings were

issued, which should be called by some name implying a unit (a

prince, for instance), we should have the tenth part of a

sovereign. A few years after, when the public were familiar with

this coin, it might be divided into one hundred instead of

ninety-six farthings; and it would then consist of twenty-five

pence, each of which would be four per cent. less in value than

the former penny. The shillings and six-pences being then

withdrawn from circulation, their place might be supplied with

silver coins each worth five of the new pence, and by others of

ten-pence, and of twopence halfpenny; the latter coin, having a

distinct name, would be the tenth part of a prince.

    170. The various manufactured commodities, and the various

property possessed by the inhabitants of a country, all become

measured by the standard thus introduced. But it must be observed

that the value of gold is itself variable; and that, like all

other commodities, its price depends on the extent of the demand

compared with that of the supply.

    171. As transactions multiply, and the sums to be paid become

large, the actual transfer of the precious metals from one

individual to another is attended with inconvenience and

difficulty, and it is found more convenient to substitute written

promises to pay on demand specified quantities of gold. These

promises are called bank-notes; and when the person or body

issuing them is known to be able to fulfil the pledge, the note

will circulate for a long time before it gets into the hands of

any person who may wish to make use of the gold it represents.

These paper representatives supply the place of a certain

quantity of gold; and, being much cheaper, a large portion of the

expense of a metallic circulation is saved by their employment.

    172. As commercial transactions increase, the transfer of

bank-notes is, to a considerable extent, superseded by shorter

processes. Banks are established, into which all monies are paid,

and out of which all payments are made, through written orders

called checks, drawn by those who keep accounts with them. In a

large capital, each bank receives, through its numerous

customers, checks payable by every other; and if clerks were sent

round to receive the amount in banknotes due from each, it would

occupy much time, and be attended with some risk and

inconvenience.

    173. Clearing house. In London this is avoided, by making all

checks paid in to bankers pass through what is technically called

The Clearing House. In a large room in Lombard Street, about

thirty clerks from the several London bankers take their

stations, in alphabetical order, at desks placed round the room;

each. having a small open box by his side, and the name of the

firm to which he belongs in large characters on the wall above

his head. From time to time other clerks from every house enter

the room, and, passing along, drop into the box the checks due by

that firm to the house from which this distributor is sent. The

clerk at the table enters the amount of the several checks in a

book previously prepared, under the name of the bank to which

they are respectively due.

    Four o'clock in the afternoon is the latest hour to which the

boxes are open to receive checks; and at a few minutes before

that time, some signs of increased activity begin to appear in

this previously quiet and business-like scene. Numerous clerks

then arrive, anxious to distribute, up to the latest possible

moment, the checks which have been paid into the houses of their

employers.

    At four o'clock all the boxes are removed, and each clerk

adds up the amount of the checks put into his box and payable by

his own to other houses. He also receives another book from his

own house, containing the amounts of the checks which their

distributing clerk has put into the box of every other banker.

Having compared these, he writes out the balances due to or from

his own house, opposite the name of each of the other banks; and

having verified this statement by a comparison with the similar

list made by the clerks of those houses, he sends to his own bank

the general balance resulting from this sheet, the amount of

which, if it is due from that to other houses, is sent back in

bank-notes.

    At five o'clock the Inspector takes his seat; when each

clerk, who has upon the result of all the transactions a balance

to pay to various other houses, pays it to the inspector, who

gives a ticket for the amount. The clerks of those houses to whom

money is due, then receive the several sums from the inspector,

who takes from them a ticket for the amount. Thus the whole of

these payments are made by a double system of balance, a very

small amount of bank-notes passing from hand to hand, and

scarcely any coin.

    174. It is difficult to form a satisfactory estimate of the

sums which daily pass through this operation: they fluctuate from

two millions to perhaps fifteen. About two millions and a half

may possibly be considered as something like an average,

requiring for its adjustment, perhaps, *200,000 in bank notes and

*20 in specie. By an agreement between the different bankers, all

checks which have the name of any firm written across them must

pass through the clearing house: consequently, if any such check

should be lost, the firm on which it is drawn would refuse to pay

it at the counter; a circumstance which adds greatly to the

convenience of commerce.

    The advantage of this system is such, that two meetings a day

have been recently established - one at twelve, the other at

three o'clock; but the payment of balances takes place once only,

at five o'clock.

    If all the private banks kept accounts with the Bank of

England, it would be possible to carry on the whole of these

transactions with a still smaller quantity of circulating medium.

    175. In reflecting on the facility with which these vast

transactions are accomplished - supposing, for the sake of

argument, that they form only the fourth part of the daily

transactions of the whole community - it is impossible not to be

struck with the importance of interfering as little as possible

with their natural adjustment. Each payment indicates a transfer

of property made for the benefit of both parties; and if it were

possible, which it is not, to place, by legal or other means,

some impediment in the way which only amounted to one-eighth per

cent, such a species of friction would produce a useless

expenditure of nearly four millions annually: a circumstance

which is deserving the attention of those who doubt the good

policy of the expense incurred by using the precious metals for

one portion of the currency of the country.

    176. One of the most obvious differences between a metallic

and a paper circulation is, that the coin can never, by any panic

or national danger, be reduced below the value of bullion in

other civilized countries; whilst a paper currency may, from the

action of such causes, totally lose its value. Both metallic and

paper money, it is true, may be depreciated, but with very

different effects.

    1. Depreciation of coin. The state may issue coin of the same

nominal value, but containing only half the original quantity of

gold, mixed with some cheap alloy; but every piece so issued

bears about with it internal evidence of the amount of the

depreciation: it is not necessary that every successive

proprietor should analyse the new coin; but a few having done so,

its intrinsic worth becomes publicly known. Of course the coin

previously in circulation is now more valuable as bullion, and

quickly disappears. All future purchases adjust themselves to the

new standard, and prices are quickly doubled; but all past

contracts also are vitiated, and all persons to whom money is

owing, if compelled to receive payment in the new coin, are

robbed of one-half of their debt, which is confiscated for the

benefit of the debtor.

    2. Depreciation of paper. The depreciation of paper money

follows a different course. If, by any act of the Government

paper is ordained to be a legal tender for debts, and, at the

same time, ceases to be exchangeable for coin, those who have

occasion to purchase of foreigners, who are not compelled to take

the notes, will make some of their payments in gold; and if the

issue of paper, unchecked by the power of demanding the gold it

represents, be continued, the whole of the coin will soon

disappear. But the public, who are obliged to take the notes, are

unable, by any internal evidence, to detect the extent of their

depreciation; it varies with the amount in circulation, and may

go on till the notes shall be worth little more than the paper on

which they are printed. During the whole of this time every

creditor is suffering to an extent which he cannot measure; and

every bargain is rendered uncertain in its advantage, by the

continually changing value of the medium through which it is

conducted. This calamitous course has actually been run in

several countries: in France, it reached nearly its extreme limit

during the existence of assignats. We have ourselves experienced

some portion of the misery it creates; but by a return to sounder

principles, have happily escaped the destruction and ruin which

always attends the completion of that career.

    177. Every person in a civilized country requires, according

to his station in life, the use of a certain quantity of money,

to make the ordinary purchases of the articles which he consumes.

The same individual pieces of coin, it is true, circulate again

and again, in the same district: the identical piece of silver,

received by the workman on Saturday night, passing through the

hands of the butcher, the baker, and the small tradesman, is,

perhaps, given by the latter to the manufacturer in exchange for

his check, and is again paid into the hands of the workman at the

end of the succeeding week. Any deficiency in this supply of

money is attended with considerable inconvenience to all parties.

If it be only in the smaller coins, the first effect is a

difficulty in procuring small change; then a disposition in the

shopkeepers to refuse change unless a purchase to a certain

amount be made; and, finally, a premium in money will be given

for changing the larger denominations of coin.

    Thus money itself varies in price, when measured by other

money in larger masses: and this effect takes place whether the

circulating medium is metallic or of paper. These effects have

constantly occurred, and particularly during the late war; and,

in order to relieve it, silver tokens for various sums were

issued by the Bank of England.

    The inconvenience and loss arising from a deficiency of small

money fall with greatest weight on the classes whose means are

least; for the wealthier buyers can readily procure credit for

their small purchases, until their bill amounts to one of the

larger coins.

    178. As money, when kept in a drawer, produces nothing, few

people, in any situation of life, will keep, either in coin or in

notes, more than is immediately necessary for their use; when,

therefore, there are no profitable modes of employing money, a

superabundance of paper will return to the source from whence it

issued, and an excess of coin will be converted into bullion and

exported.

    179. Since the worth of all property is measured by money, it

is obviously conducive to the general welfare of the community,

that fluctuations in its value should be rendered as small and as

gradual as possible.

    The evils which result from sudden changes in the value of

money will perhaps become more sensible, if we trace their

effects in particular instances. Assuming, as we are quite at

liberty to do, an extreme case, let us suppose three persons,

each possessing a hundred pounds: one of these, a widow advanced

in years, and who, by the advice of her friends, purchases with

that sum an annuity of twenty pounds a year during her life: and

let the two others be workmen, who, by industry and economy, have

each saved a hundred pounds out of their wages; both these latter

persons proposing to procure machines for calendering, and to

commence that business. One of these invests his money in a

savings' bank; intending to make his own calendering machine, and

calculating that he shall expend twenty pounds in materials, and

the remaining eighty in supporting himself and in paying the

workmen who assist him in constructing it. The other workman,

meeting with a machine which he can buy for two hundred pounds,

agrees to pay for it a hundred pounds immediately, and the

remainder at the end of a twelvemonth. Let us now imagine some

alteration to take place in the currency, by which it is

depreciated one-half: prices soon adjust themselves to the new

circumstances, and the annuity of the widow, though nominally of

the same amount, will, in reality, purchase only half the

quantity of the necessaries of life which it did before. The

workman who had placed his money in the savings' bank, having

perhaps purchased ten pounds' worth of materials, and expended

ten pounds in labour applied to them, now finds himself, by this

alteration in the currency, possessed nominally of eighty pounds,

but in reality of a sum. which will purchase only half the labour

and materials required to finish his machine; and he can neither

complete it, from want of capital, nor dispose of what he has

already done in its unfinished state for the price it has cost

him. In the meantime, the other workman, who had incurred a debt

of a hundred pounds in order to complete the purchase of his

calendering machine, finds that the payments he receives for

calendering, have, like all other prices, doubled, in consequence

of the depreciation of the currency; and he has therefore, in

fact, obtained his machine for one hundred and fifty pounds.

Thus, without any fault or imprudence, and owing to circumstances

over which they have no control, the widow is reduced almost to

starve; one workman is obliged to renounce, for several years,

his hope of becoming a master; and another, without any superior

industry or skill, but in fact, from having made, with reference

to his circumstances, rather an imprudent bargain, finds himself

unexpectedly relieved from half his debt, and the possessor of a

valuable source of profit; whilst the former owner of the

machine, if he also has invested the money arising from its sale

in the savings' bank, finds his property suddenly reduced

one-half.

    180. These evils, to a greater or less extent, attend every

change in the value of the currency; and the importance of

preserving it as far as possible unaltered in value, cannot be

too strongly impressed upon all classes of the community.



NOTES:



1. In Russia platinum has been employed for coin; and it

possesses a peculiarity which deserves notice. Platinum cannot be

melted in our furnaces, and is chiefly valuable in commerce when

in the shape of ingots, from which it may be forged into useful

forms. But when a piece of platinum is cut into two parts, it

cannot easily be reunited except by means of a chemical process,

in which both parts are dissolved in an acid. Hence, when

platinum coin is too abundant, it cannot, like gold, be reduced

into masses by melting, but must pass through an expensive

process to render it useful.



Chapter 15



On the Influence of Verification on Price



    181. The money price of an article at any given period is

usually stated to depend upon the proportion between the supply

and the demand. The average price of the same article during a

long period, is said to depend, ultimately, on the power of

producing and selling it with the ordinary profits of capital.

But these principles, although true in their general sense, are

yet so often modified by the influence of others, that it becomes

necessary to examine a little into the disturbing forces.

    182. With respect to the first of these propositions, it may

be observed, that the cost of any article to the purchaser

includes, besides the ratio of the supply to the demand, another

element, which, though often of little importance, is, in many

cases, of great consequence. The cost, to the purchaser, is the

price he pays for any article, added to the cost of verifying the

fact of its having that degree of goodness for which he

contracts. In some cases the goodness of the article is evident

on mere inspection: and in those cases there is not much

difference of price at different shops. The goodness of loaf

sugar, for instance, can be discerned almost at a glance; and the

consequence is, that the price is so uniform, and the profit upon

it so small, that no grocer is at all anxious to sell it; whilst,

on the other hand, tea, of which it is exceedingly difficult to

judge, and which can be adulterated by mixture so as to deceive

the skill even of a practised eye, has a great variety of

different prices, and is that article which every grocer is most

anxious to sell to his customers.

    The difficulty and expense of verification are, in some

instances, so great, as to justify the deviation from

well-established principles. Thus it is a general maxim that

Government can purchase any article at a cheaper rate than that

at which they can manufacture it themselves. But it has

nevertheless been considered more economical to build extensive

flour-mills (such are those at Deptford), and to grind their own

corn, than to verify each sack of purchased flour, and to employ

persons in devising methods of detecting the new modes of

adulteration which might be continually resorted to.

    183. Some years since, a mode of preparing old clover and

trefoil seeds by a process called doctoring, became so prevalent

as to excite the attention of the House of Commons. It appeared

in evidence before a committee, that the old seed of the white

clover was doctored by first wetting it slightly, and then drying

it with the fumes of burning sulphur. and that the red clover

seed had its colour improved by shaking it in a sack with a small

quantity of indigo; but this being detected after a time, the

doctors then used a preparation of logwood, fined by a little

copperas, and sometimes by verdigris; thus at once improving the

appearance of the old seed, and diminishing, if not destroying,

its vegetative power already enfeebled by age. Supposing no

injury had resulted to good seed so prepared, it was proved that

from the improved appearance, the market price would be enhanced

by this process from five to twenty-five shillings a hundred

weight. But the greatest evil arose from the circumstance of

these processes rendering old and worthless seed equal in

appearance to the best. One witness had tried some doctored seed,

and found that not above one grain in a hundred grew, and that

those which did vegetate died away afterwards; whilst about

eighty or ninety per cent of good seed usually grows. The seed so

treated was sold to retail dealers in the country, who of course

endeavoured to purchase at the cheapest rate, and from them it

got into the hands of the farmers; neither of these classes being

capable of distinguishing the fraudulent from the genuine seed.

Many cultivators, in consequence, diminished their consumption of

the article; and others were obliged to pay a higher price to

those who had skill to distinguish the mixed seed, and who had

integrity and character to prevent them from dealing in it.

    184. In the Irish flax trade, a similar example of the high

price paid for verification occurs. It is stated in the report of

the committee, 'That the natural excellent quality of Irish flax,

as contrasted with foreign or British, has been admitted.' Yet

from the evidence before that committee it appears that Irish

flax sells, in the market, from 1d. to 2d. per pound less than

other flax of equal or inferior quality. Part of this difference

of price arises from negligence in its preparation, but a part

also from the expense of ascertaining that each parcel is free

from useless matter to add to its weight: this appears from the

evidence of Mr J. Corry, who was, during twenty-seven years,

Secretary to the Irish Linen-Board:



The owners of the flax, who are almost always people in the lower

classes of life, believe that they can best advance their own

interests by imposing on the buyers. Flax being sold by weight,

various expedients are used to increase it; and every expedient

is injurious, particularly the damping of it; a very common

practice, which makes the flax afterwards heat. The inside of

every bundle (and the bundles all vary in bulk) is often full of

pebbles, or dirt of various kinds, to increase the weight. In

this state it is purchased, and exported to Great Britain. The

natural quality of Irish flax is admitted to be not inferior to

that produced by any foreign country; and yet the flax of every

foreign country, imported into Great Britain, obtains a

preference amongst the purchasers, because the foreign flax is

brought to the British market in a cleaner and more regular

state. The extent and value of the sales of foreign flax in Great

Britain can be seen by reference to the public accounts; and I am

induced to believe, that Ireland, by an adequate extension of her

flax tillage, and having her flax markets brought under good

regulations, could, without encroaching in the least degree upon

the quantity necessary for her home consumption, supply the whole

of the demand of the British market, to the exclusion of the

foreigners.



    185. The lace trade affords other examples; and, in enquiring

into the complaints made to the House of Commons by the framework

knitters, the committee observe, that, 'It is singular that the

grievance most complained of one hundred and fifty years ago,

should, in the present improved state of the trade, be the same

grievance which is now most complained of: for it appears, by the

evidence given before your committee, that all the witnesses

attribute the decay of the trade more to the making of fraudulent

and bad articles, than to the war, or to any other cause., And it

is shown by the evidence, that a kind of lace called single-press

was manufactured, which, although good to the eye, became nearly

spoiled in washing by the slipping of the threads; that not one

person in a thousand could distinguish the difference between

single-press and double-press lace; and that, even workmen and

manufacturers were obliged to employ a magnifying glass for that

purpose; and that, in another similar article, called warp lace,

such aid was essential. It was also stated by one witness, that:



The trade had not yet ceased, excepting in those places where the

fraud had been discovered; and from those places no orders are

now sent for any sort of Nottingham lace, the credit being

totally ruined.



186. In the stocking trade similar frauds have been practised. It

appeared in evidence, that stockings were made of uniform width

from the knee down to the ankle, and being wetted and stretched

on frames at the calf, they retained their shape when dry. but

that the purchaser could not discover the fraud until, after the

first washing, the stockings hung like bags about his ankles.

    l87. In the watch trade the practice of deceit, in forging

the marks and names of respectable makers, has been carried to a

great extent both by natives and foreigners; and the effect upon

our export trade has been most injurious, as the following

extract from the evidence before a committee of the House of

Commons will prove:



Question. How long have you been in the trade?

Answer. Nearly thirty years.

Question. The trade is at present much depressed?

Answer. Yes, sadly.

Question. What is your opinion of the cause of that distress?

Answer. I think it is owing to a number of watches that have been

made so exceedingly bad that they will hardly look at them in the

foreign markets; all with a handsome outside show, and the works

hardly fit for anything.

Question. Do you mean to say, that all the watches made in this

country are of that description?

Answer. No; only a number which are made up by some of the Jews,

and other low manufacturers. I recollect something of the sort

years ago, of a falloff of the East India work, owing to there

being a number of handsome-looking watches sent out, for

instance, with hands on and figures, as if they showed seconds,

and had not any work regular to show the seconds: the hand went

round, but it was not regular.

Question. They had no perfect movements?

Answer. No, they had not; that was a long time since, and we had

not any East India work for a long time afterwards.



    In the home market, inferior but showy watches are made at a

cheap rate, which are not warranted by the maker to go above half

an hour; about the time occupied by the Jew pedlar in deluding

his country customer.

    188. The practice, in retail linen-drapers' shops, of calling

certain articles yard wide when the real width is perhaps, only

seven-eighths or three-quarters, arose at first from fraud, which

being detected, custom was pleaded in its defence: but the result

is, that the vender is constantly obliged to measure the width of

his goods in the customer's presence. In all these instances the

object of the seller is to get a higher price than his goods

would really produce if their quality were known; and the

purchaser, if not himself a skilful judge (which rarely happens

to be the case), must pay some person, in the shape of an

additional money price, who has skill to distinguish, and

integrity to furnish, articles of the quality agreed on. But as

the confidence of persons in their own judgement is usually

great, large numbers will always flock to the cheap dealer, who

thus, attracting many customers from the honest tradesman,

obliges him to charge a higher price for his judgement and

character than, without such competition, he could afford to do.

    189. There are few things which the public are less able to

judge of than the quality of drugs; and when these are compounded

into medicines it is scarcely possible, even for medical men, to

decide whether pure or adulterated ingredients have been

employed. This circumstance, concurring with the present

injudicious mode of paying for medical assistance, has produced a

curious effect on the price of medicines. Apothecaries, instead

of being paid for their services and skill, are remunerated by

being allowed to place a high charge upon their medicines, which

are confessedly of very small pecuniary value. The effect of such

a system is an inducement to prescribe more medicine than is

necessary; and in fact, even with the present charges, the

apothecary, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, cannot be

fairly remunerated unless the patient either takes, or pays for,

more physic than he really requires. The apparent extravagance of

the charge of eighteen pence for a two-ounce phial(1*) of

medicine, is obvious to many who do not reflect on the fact that

a great part of the charge is, in reality, payment for the

exercise of professional skill. As the same charge is made by the

apothecary, whether he attends the patient or merely prepares the

prescription of a physician, the chemist and druggist soon

offered to furnish the same commodity at a greatly diminished

price. But the eighteen pence charged by the apothecary might

have been fairly divided into two parts, three pence for medicine

and bottle, and fifteen pence for attendance. The chemist,

therefore, who never attends his customers, if he charges only a

shilling for the same medicine, realizes a profit of 200 or 300

per cent upon its value. This enormous profit has called into

existence a multitude of competitors; and in this instance the

impossibility of verifying has, in a great measure, counteracted

the beneficial effects of competition. The general adulteration

of drugs, even at the extremely high price at which they are

retailed as medicine, enables those who are supposed to sell them

in an unadulterated state to make large profits, whilst the same

evil frequently disappoints the expectation, and defeats the

skill, of the most eminent physician.

    It is difficult to point out a remedy for this evil without

suggesting an almost total change in the system of medical

practice. If the apothecary were to charge for his visits, and to

reduce his medicines to one-fourth or one-fifth of their present

price, he would still have an interest in procuring the best

drugs, for the sake of his own reputation or skill. Or if the

medical attendant, who is paid more highly for his time, were to

have several pupils, he might himself supply the medicines

without a specific charge, and his pupils would derive

improvement from compounding them, as well as from examining the

purity of the drugs he would purchase. The public would gain

several advantages by this arrangement. In the first place, it

would be greatly for the interest of the medical practitioner to

have the best drugs; it would be in his interest also not to give

more physic than needful; and it would enable him, through some

of his more advanced pupils, to watch more frequently the changes

of any malady.

    190. There are many articles of hardware which it is

impossible for the purchaser to verify at the time of purchase,

or even afterwards, without defacing them. Plated harness and

coach furniture may be adduced as examples: these are usually of

wrought iron covered with silver, owing their strength to the one

and a certain degree of permanent beauty to the other metal. Both

qualities are, occasionally, much impaired by substituting cast-

for wrought-iron, and by plating with soft solder (tin and lead)

instead of with hard solder (silver and brass). The loss of

strength is the greatest evil in this case; for cast iron, though

made for this purpose more tough than usual by careful annealing,

is still much weaker than wrought-iron, and serious accidents

often arise from harness giving way. In. plating with soft

solder, a very thin plate of silver is made to cover the iron,

but it is easily detached, particularly by a low degree of heat.

Hard soldering gives a better coat of silver, which is very

firmly attached, and is not easily injured unless by a very high

degree of heat. The inferior can be made to look nearly as well

as the better article, and the purchaser can scarcely discover

the difference without cutting into it.

    191. The principle that price, at any moment, is dependent on

the relation of the supply to the demand, is true to the full

extent only when the whole supply is in the hands of a very large

number of small holders, and the demand is caused by the wants of

another set of persons, each of whom requires only a very small

quantity. And the reason appears to be, that it is only in such

circumstances that a uniform average can be struck between the

feelings, the passions, the prejudices, the opinions, and the

knowledge, of both parties. If the supply, or present stock in

hand, be entirely in the possession of one person, he will

naturally endeavour to put such a price upon it as shall produce

by its sale the greatest quantity of money; but he will be guided

in this estimate of the price at which he will sell, both by the

knowledge that increased price will cause a diminished

consumption, and by the desire to realize his profit before a new

supply shall reach the market from some other quarter. If,

however, the same stock is in the hands of several dealers, there

will be an immediate competition between them, arising partly

from their different views of the duration of the present state

of supply, and partly from their own peculiar circumstances with

respect to the employment of their capital.

    192. The expense of ascertaining that the price charged is

that which is legally due is sometimes considerable. The

inconvenience which this verification produces in the case of

parcels sent by coaches is very great. The time lost in

recovering an overcharge generally amounts to so many times the

value of the sum recovered, that it is but rarely resorted to. It

seems worthy of consideration whether it would not be a

convenience to the public if government were to undertake the

general conveyance of parcels somewhat on the same system with

that on which the post is now conducted. The certainty of their

delivery, and the absence of all attempt at overcharge, would

render the prohibition of rival carriers unnecessary. Perhaps an

experiment might be made on this subject by enlarging the weight

allowed to be sent by the two-penny post, and by conveying works

in sheets by the general post.

    This latter suggestion would be of great importance to

literature, and consequently to the circulation of knowledge. As

the post-office regulations stand at present, it constantly

happens that persons who have an extensive reputation for

science, receive by post, from foreign countries, works, or parts

of works, for which they are obliged to pay a most extravagant

rate of postage, or else refuse to take in some interesting

communication. In France and Germany, printed sheets of paper are

forwarded by post at a very moderate expense, and it is fit that

the science and literature of England should be equally favoured.

    193. It is important, if possible, always to connect the name

of the workman with the work he has executed: this secures for

him the credit or the blame he may justly deserve; and

diminishes, in some cases, the necessity of verification. The

extent to which this is carried in literary works, published in

America, is remarkable. In the translation of the Mecanique

Celeste by Mr Bowditch, not merely the name of the printer, but

also those of the compositors, are mentioned in the work.

    194. Again, if the commodity itself is of a perishable

nature, such. for example, as a cargo of ice imported into the

port of London from Norway a few summers since, then time will

supply the place of competition; and, whether the article is in

the possession of one or of many persons, it will scarcely reach

a monopoly price. The history of cajeput oil during the last few

months, offers a curious illustration of the effect of opinion

upon price. In July of last year, 1831, cajeput oil was sold,

exclusive of duty, at 7 d. per ounce. The disease which had

ravaged the East was then supposed to be approaching our shores,

and its proximity created alarm. At this period, the oil in

question began to be much talked of, as a powerful remedy in that

dreadful disorder; and in September it rose to the price of 3s.

and 4s. the ounce. In October there were few or no sales: but in

the early part of November, the speculations in this substance

reached their height, and between the 1st and the 15th it

realized the following prices: 3s. 9d., 5s., 6s. 6d., 7s. 6d.,

8s., 9s., 10s., 10s. 6d., 11s. After 15 November, the holders of

cajeput oil were anxious to sell at much lower rates; and in

December a fresh arrival was offered by public sale at 5s., and

withdrawn, being sold afterwards, as it was understood, by

private contract, at 4s. or 4s. 6d. per oz. Since that time, 1s.

6d. and 1s. have been realized; and a fresh arrival, which is

daily expected (March, 1832) will probably reduce it below the

price of July. Now it is important to notice, that in November,

the time of greatest speculation, the quantity in the market was

held by few persons, and that it frequently changed hands, each

holder being desirous to realize his profit. The quantity

imported since that time has also been considerable.(2*)

    195. The effect of the equalization of price by an increased

number of dealers, may be observed in the price of the various

securities sold at the Stock Exchange. The number of persons who

deal in the 3 per cent stock being large, any one desirous of

selling can always dispose of his stock at one-eighth per cent

under the market price; but those who wish to dispose of bank

stock, or of any other securities of more limited circulation,

are obliged to make a sacrifice of eight or ten times this amount

upon each hundred pounds value.

    196. The frequent speculations in oil, tallow, and other

commodities, which must occur to the memory of most of my

readers, were always founded on the principle of purchasing up

all the stock on hand, and agreeing for the purchase of the

expected arrivals; thus proving the opinion of capitalists to be,

that a larger average price may be procured by the stock being

held by few persons.



NOTES:



1. Apothecaries frequently purchase these phials at the old

bottle warehouses at ten shillings per gross; so that when their

servant has washed them, the cost of the phial is nearly one

penny.



2. I have understood that the price of camphor, at the same time,

suffered similar changes.



Chapter 16



On the Influence of Durability on Price



    197. Having now considered the circumstances that modify what

may be called the momentary amount of price, we must next examine

a principle which seems to have an effect on its permanent

average. The durability of any commodity influences its cost in a

permanent manner. We have already stated that what may be called

the momentary price of any commodity depends upon the proportion

existing between the supply and demand, and also upon the cost of

verification. The average price, during a long period, will

depend upon the labour required for producing and bringing it to

market, as well as upon the average supply and demand; but it

will also be influenced by the durability of the article

manufactured.

    Many things in common use are substantially consumed in

using: a phosphorus match, articles of food, and a cigar, are

examples of this description. Some things after use become

inapplicable to their former purposes, as paper which has been

printed upon: but it is yet available for the cheesemonger or the

trunk-maker. Some articles, as pens, are quickly worn out by use;

and some are still valuable after a long continued wear. There

are others, few perhaps in number, which never wear out; the

harder precious stones, when well cut and polished, are of this

later class: the fashion of the gold or silver mounting in which

they are set may vary with the taste of the age, and such

ornaments are constantly exposed for sale as second-hand, but the

gems themselves, when removed from their supports, are never so

considered. A brilliant which has successively graced the necks

of a hundred beauties, or glittered for a century upon patrician

brows, is weighed by the diamond merchant in the same scale with

another which has just escaped from the wheel of the lapidary,

and will be purchased or sold by him at the same price per carat.

The great mass of commodities is intermediate in its character

between these two extremes, and the periods of respective

duration are very various. It is evident that the average price

of those things which are consumed in the act of using them, can

never be less than that of the labour of bringing them to market.

They may for a short time be sold for less, but under such

circumstances their production must soon cease altogether. On the

other hand, if an article never wears out, its price may continue

permanently below the cost of the labour expended in producing

it; and the only consequence will be, that no further production

will take place: its price will continue to be regulated by the

relation of the supply to the demand; and should that at any

aftertime rise, for a considerable period, above the cost of

production, it will be again produced.

    198. Articles become old from actual decay, or the wearing

out of their parts; from improved modes of constructing them; or

from changes in their form and fashion, required by the varying

taste of the age. In the two latter cases, their utility is but

little diminished; and, being less sought after by those who have

hitherto employed them, they are sold at a reduced price to a

class of society rather below that of their former possessors.

Many articles of furniture, such as well-made tables and chairs,

are thus found in the rooms of those who would have been quite

unable to have purchased them when new; and we find constantly,

even in the houses of the more opulent, large looking-glasses

which have passed successively through the hands of several

possessors, changing only the fashion of their frames; and in

some instances even this alteration is omitted, an additional

coat of gilding saving them from the character of being

second-hand. Thus a taste for luxuries is propagated downwards in

society'. and, after a short period, the numbers who have

acquired new wants become sufficient to excite the ingenuity of

the manufacturer to reduce the cost of supplying them, whilst he

is himself benefited by the extended scale of demand.

    199. There is a peculiarity in looking-glasses with reference

to the principle just mentioned. The most frequent occasion of

injury to them arises from accidental violence; and the

peculiarity is, that, unlike most other articles, when broken

they are still of some value. If a large mirror is accidentally

cracked, it is immediately cut into two or more smaller ones,

each of which may be perfect. If the degree of violence is so

great as to break it into many fragments, these smaller pieces

may be cut into squares for dressing-glasses; and if the

silvering is injured, it can either be resilvered or used as

plate-glass for glazing windows. The addition from our

manufactories to the stock of plate-glass in the country is

annually about two hundred and fifty thousand square feet. It

would be very difficult to estimate the quantity annually

destroyed or exported, but it is probably small; and the effect

of these continual additions is seen in the diminished price and

increased consumption of the article. Almost all the better order

of shop fronts are now glazed with it. If it were quite

indestructible, the price would continually diminish; and unless

an increased demand arose from new uses, or from a greater number

of customers, a single manufactory, unchecked by competition,

would ultimately be compelled to shut up, driven out of the

market by the permanance of its own productions.

    200. The metals are in some degree permanent, although

several of them are employed in such forms that they are

ultimately lost.

    Copper is a metal of which a great proportion returns to use:

a part of that employed in sheathing ships and covering houses is

lost from corrosion; but the rest is generally remelted. Some is

lost in small brass articles, and some is consumed in the

formation of salts, Roman vitriol (sulphate of copper), verdigris

(acetate of copper), and verditer.

    Gold is wasted in gilding and in embroidering; but a portion

of this is recovered by burning the old articles. Some portion is

lost by the wear of gold, but, upon the whole, it possesses

considerable permanence.

    Iron. A proportion of this metal is wasted by oxidation, in

small nails, in fine wire; by the wear of tools, and of the tire

of wheels, and by the formation of some dyes: but much, both of

cast- and of wrought-iron, returns to use.

    Lead is wasted in great quantities. Some portion of that

which is used in pipes and in sheets for covering roofs returns

to the melting-pot; but large quantities are consumed in the form

of small shot, or sometimes in that of musket balls, litharge,

and red lead, for white and red paints, for glass-making, for

glazing pottery, and for sugar of lead (acetate of lead).

    Silver is rather a permanent metal. Some portion is consumed

in the wear of coin, in that of silver plate, and a portion in

silvering and embroidering.

    Tin. The chief waste of this metal arises from tinned iron;

some is lost in solder and in solutions for the dyers.



Chapter 17



Of Price as Measured by Money



    201. The money price at which an article sells furnishes us

with comparatively little information respecting its value, if we

compare distant intervals of time and different countries; for

gold and silver, in which price is usually measured, are

themselves subject, like all other commodities, to changes in

value; nor is there any standard to which these variations can be

referred. The average price of a certain quality of different

manufactured articles, or of raw produce, has been suggested as a

standard; but a new difficulty then presents itself; for the

improved methods of producing such articles render their money

price extremely variable within very limited periods. The annexed

table will afford a striking instance of this kind of change

within a period of only twelve years.



 Prices of the following articles at Birmingham, in the

undermentioned years



 Description 1818 1824 1828 1830

 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.

 Anvils cwt 25 0 20 0 16 0 13 0

 Awls, polished, Liverpool gross 2 6 2 0 1 6 1 2

 Bed-screws, 6 inches long gross 18 0 15 0 6 0 5 0

 Bits, tinned. for bridles doz. 5 0 5 0 3 3 2 6

 Bolts for doors, 6 inches doz. 6 0 5 0 2 3 1 6

 Braces for carpenters, with 12 bits set 9 0 4 0 4 2 3 5

 Buttons, for coats gross 4 6 6 3 3 0 2 2

 Buttons, small, for waistcoats gross 2 6 2 0 1 2 0 8

 Candlesticks, 6 in., brass pair 2 1 1 2 0 1 7 1 2

 Curry-combs, six barred doz. 2 9 2 6 1 5 0 1 1

 Frying-pans cwt 25 0 21 0 18 0 16 0

 Gun-locks, single roller each 6 0 5 2 1 10 1 6

 Hammers. shoe, No. 0 doz. 6 9 3 9 3 0 2 9







Description 1818 1824 1828 1830

 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.

 Hinges, cast-butts, 1 inch doz. 0 10 0 71/2 0 31/4 0 21/4

 Knobs, brass, 2 inches for commodes doz. 4 0 3 6 1 6 1 2

 Latches for doors, bright thumb doz. 2 3 2 2 1 0 0 9

 Locks for doors, iron rim, 6 inches doz. 38 0 32 0 15 0 13 6

 Sad-irons and other castings cwt 22 6 20 0 14 0 11 6

 Shovel and tongs, fire-irons pair 1 0 1 0 0 9 0 6

 Spoons, tinned table gross 17 6 15 0 10 0 7 0

 Stirrups, plated pair 4 6 3 9 1 6 1 1

 Trace-chains cwt 28 0 25 0 19 6 16 6

 Trays, japanned tea, 30 inches each 4 6 3 0 2 0 1 5

 Vices for blacksmiths cwt 30 0 28 0 22 0 19 6

 Wire, brass lb. 1 10 1 4 1 0 0 9

 --, iron, No. 6 bund. 16 0 13 0 9 0 7 0



    202. I have taken some pains to assure myself of the accuracy

of the above table: at different periods of the years quoted the

prices may have varied; but I believe it may be considered as a

fair approximation. In the course of my enquiries I have been

favoured with another list, in which many of the same articles

occur., but in this last instance the prices quoted are separated

by an interval of twenty years. It is extracted from the books of

a highly respectable house at Birmingham; and the prices confirm

the accuracy of the former table, so far as they relate to the

articles which are found in that list.



 Prices of 1812 and 1832

 Reduction

 per cent in

 price of

 Description 1812 1832 1812

 s. d. s. d.



 Anvils cwt 25 0 14 0 44

 Awls, Liverpool blades gross 3 6 1 0 71

 Candlesticks, iron, plain 3 103/4 2 31/2 41

 screwed 6 41/2 3 9 41

 Bed screws, 6 inch square head gross 7 6 4 6 40

 flat head gross 8 6 4 8 45

 Curry-combs, 6 barred dozen 4 01/2 1 0 75



 Reduction

 per cent in

 price of

 Description 1812 1832 1812

 s. d. s. d.



Curry-combs, 8 barred dozen 5 51/2 1 5 74

 patent, 6 barred dozen 7 11/2 1 5 80

 8 barred dozen 8 63/4 1 10 79

 Fire-irons, iron head, No. 1. 1 41/2 0 73/4 53

 No. 2 1 6 0 81/2 53

 No. 3 1 81/4 0 91/2 53

 No. 4 1 101/2 0 101/2 53

 Gun-locks, single roller each 7 21/2 1 11 73

 Locks, 1 1/4 brass, port. pad 16 0 2 6 85

 2 1/2 inch 3 keyed till-locks each 2 2 0 9 65

 Shoe tacks gross 5 0 2 0 60

 Spoons, tinned, iron table gross 22 6 7 0 69

 Stirrups. com. tinned, 2 bar dozen 7 0 2 9 61

 Trace-chains, iron cwt 46 91/2 15 0 68



 Prices of the principal materials, used in mines in Cornwall, at

different periods [I am indebited to Mr John Taylor for this

interesting table]



 ALL DELIVERED AT THE MINES



 Description 1800 1810 1820 1830 1832

 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.

 Coals wey 81 7 85 5 53 4 51 0 40 0

 Timber (balk) foot 2 0 4 0 1 5 1 0 0 10

 (oak) foot 3 31/2 3 0 3 6 3 3

 Ropes cwt 66 0 84 0 48 6 40 0 40 0

 Iron (common bar) cwt 20 6 14 6 11 0 7 0 6 6

 Common castings cwt 16 0 15 0 8 0 6 6

 Pumps cwt 16s. & 17s. 17s. & 18s. 12s. & 15s. 6 6 6 10

 Gunpowder 100 lbs. 114 2 117 6 68 0 52 6 49 0

 Candles 9 3 10 0 8 9 5 11 4 10

 Tallow cwt 72 0 84 0 65 8 52 6 43 0

 Leather lb. 2 4 2 3 24 22 21

 Blistered steel cwt 50 0 44 0 38 0

 2s. nails cwt 32 0 28 6 22 0 17 0 16 6



    203. I cannot omit availing myself of this opportunity of

calling the attention of the manufacturers, merchants, and

factors, in all our manufacturing and commercial towns, to the

great importance, both for their own interests, and for that of

the population to which their capital gives employment, of

collecting with care such averages from the actual sales

registered in their books. Nor, perhaps, would it be without its

use to suggest, that such averages would be still more valuable

if collected from as many different quarters as possible; that

the quantity of the goods from which they are deduced, together

with the greatest deviations from the mean, ought to be given;

and that if a small committee were to undertake the task, it

would give great additional weight to the information. Political

economists have been reproached with too small a use of facts,

and too large an employment of theory. If facts are wanting, let

it be remembered that the closet-philosopher is unfortunately too

little acquainted with the admirable arrangements of the factory,

and that no class of persons can supply so readily, and with so

little sacrifice of time, the data on which all the reasonings of

political economists are founded, as the merchant and

manufacturer; and, unquestionably, to no class are the deductions

to which they give rise so important. Nor let it be feared that

erroneous deductions may be made from such recorded facts: the

errors which arise from the absence of facts are far more

numerous and more durable than those which result from unsound

reasoning respecting true data.

    204. The great diminution in price of the articles here

enumerated may have arisen from several causes: 1. The alteration

in the value of the currency. 2. The increased value of gold in

consequence of the increased demand for coin. The first of these

causes may have had some influence. and the second may have had a

very small effect upon the two first quotations of prices, but

none at all upon the two latter ones. 3. The diminished rate of

profit produced by capital however employed. This may be

estimated by the average price of three per cents at the periods

stated. 4. The diminished price of the raw materials out of which

these articles were manufactured. The raw material is principally

brass and iron, and the reduction upon it may, in some measure,

be estimated by the diminished price of iron and brass wire, in

the cost of which articles, the labour bears a less proportion

than it does in many of the others. 5. The smaller quantity of

raw material employed, and perhaps, in some instances, an

inferior, quality of workmanship. 6. The improved means by which

the same effect was produced by diminished labour.

    205. In order to afford the means of estimating the influence

of these several causes, the following table is subjoined:



 1812 1818 1824 1828 1830 1832

 Average Price of * s d. * s. d. * s d * s. d * s d * s. d

 Gold. per oz 4 15 6 4 0 3 17 61/2 3 17 7 3 17 91/2 3 17 10 1/2

 Value of currency. per cent 79 5 3 97 6 10 100 100 100 100

 Price of 3 per cent consols 591/4 781/4 935/8 86 893/4 821/2

 Wheat per quarter 6 5 0 4 1 0 3 2 l 3 1 1 10 3 14 6 2 19 3



 English pig iron at Birmingham 7 l0 0 6 7 6 6 l0 0 5 10 0 4 l0 0



 English bar iron at Birmingham 10 10 0 9 10 0 7 15 0 6 0 0 5 0 0

 Swedish bar iron in London. excluding duty of from *4 to *6 10s

per ton 16 10 0 17 10 0 14 0 0 14 10 0 13 15 0 13 2 0



    As this table, if unaccompanied by any explanation, might

possibly lead to erroneous conclusions, I subjoin the following

observations, for which I am indebted to the kindness of Mr


Tooke, who may yet, I hope, be induced to continue his valuable

work on High and Low Prices, through the important period which

has elapsed since its publication.

    'The table commences with 1812, and exhibits a great falling

off in the price of wheat and iron coincidently with a fall in

the price of gold, and leading to the inference of cause and

effect. Now, as regards wheat, it so happened that in 1812 it

reached its highest price in consequence of a series of bad

harvests, when relief by importation was difficult and enormously

expensive. In December, 1813, whilst the price of gold had risen

to *5, the price of wheat had fallen to 73s., or 50 per cent

under what it had been in the spring of 1812; proving clearly

that the two articles were under the influence of opposite

causes.

    'Again, in 1812, the freight and insurance on Swedish iron

were so much higher than at present as to account for nearly the

whole of the difference of price: and in 1818 there had been an

extensive speculation which had raised the price of all iron, so

that a part of the subsequent decline was a mere reaction from a

previously unfounded elevation. More recently, in 1825, there was

a great speculative rise in the article, which served as a strong

stimulus to increased production: this, aided by improved power

of machinery, has proceeded to such an extent as fully to account

for the fall of price.'

    To these reflections I will only add, that the result of my

own observation leads me to believe that by far the most

influential of these causes has been the invention of cheaper

modes of manufacturing. The extent to which this can be carried,

while a profit can yet be realized at the reduced price, is truly

astonishing, as the following fact, which rests on good

authority, will prove. Twenty years since, a brass knob for the

locks of doors was made at Birmingham; the price, at that time,

being 13s. 4d. per dozen. The same article is now manufactured,

having the same weight of metal, and an equal, or in fact a

slightly superior finish, at 1s. 9 1/4d. per dozen. One

circumstance which has produced this economy in the manufacture

is, that the lathe on which these knobs are finished is now

turned by a steam-engine; so that the workman, relieved from that

labour, can make them twenty times as fast as he did formerly.

    206. The difference of price of the same article, when of

various dimensions at different periods in the same country - and

in different countries - is curiously contrasted in the annexed

table.



 Comparative price of plate glass, at the manufactories of

London, Paris, Berlin, and Petersburg



 DIMENSIONS LONDON PARIS BERLIN PETERSBURG

 Height Breadth 1771 1794 1832 1825 1835 1828 1825

 in inches in inches * s d * s d * s d * s d * s d * s d * s d

 16 16 0103 0101 0176 087 076 081 0410

 30 20 146 232 2610 11610 1710 0106 1210

 50 30 24 2 4 11 5 0 6 12 10 9 0 5 5 0 3 8 13 0 5 15 0

 60 40 67 14 10 27 0 0 13 9 6 22 7 5 10 4 3 21 18 0 12 9 0

 76 40 43 6 0 19 2 9 36 4 5 14 17 5 35 2 11 17 5 0

 90 50 84 8 0 34 12 9 71 3 8 28 13 4 33 18 7

 100 75 275 0 0 74 5 10 210 13 3 70 9 7

 120 75 97 15 9 354 3 2 98 3 10



    The price of silvering these plates is twenty per cent on the

cost price for English glass; ten per cent on the cost price for

Paris plates; and twelve and a half on those of Berlin.

    The following table shows the dimensions and price, when

silvered, of the largest plates of glass ever made by the British

Plate Glass Company, which are now at their warehouse in London:



Height Breadth Price when silvered

 Inches Inches * s. d.



 132 84 200 8 0

 146 81 220 7 0

 149 84 239 1 6

 131 83 239 10 7

 160 8O 246 15 4



    The prices of the largest glass in the Paris lists when

silvered, and reduced to English measure, were:



Year Inches Inches Price when silvered

                        *  s. d.

 1825 128 80           629 12 0

 1835 128 80           136 19 0



    207. If we wish to compare the value of any article at

different periods of time, it is clear that neither any one

substance, nor even the combination of all manufactured goods,

can furnish us with an invariable unit by which to form our scale

of estimation. Mr Malthus has proposed for this purpose to

consider a day's labour of an agricultural labourer, as the unit

to which all value should be referred. Thus, if we wish to

compare the value of twenty yards of broad cloth in Saxony at the

present time, with that of the same kind and quantity of cloth

fabricated in England two centuries ago, we must find the number

of days' labour the cloth would have purchased in England at the

time mentioned, and compare it with the number of days' labour

which the same quantity of cloth will now purchase in Saxony.

Agricultural labour appears to have been selected, because it

exists in all countries, and employs a large number of persons,

and also because it requires a very small degree of previous

instruction. It seems, in fact, to be merely the exertion of a

man's physical force; and its value above that of a machine of

equal power arises from its portability, and from the facility of

directing its efforts to arbitrary and continually fluctuating

purposes. It may perhaps be worthy of enquiry, whether a more

constant average might not be deduced from combining with this

species of labour those trades which require but a moderate

exertion of skill and which likewise exist in all civilized

countries, such as those of the blacksmith and carpenter,

etc.(1*) In all such comparisons there is, however, another

element, which, though not essentially necessary, will yet add

much to our means of judging.

    It is an estimate of the quantity of that food on which the

labourer usually subsists, which is necessary for his daily

support, compared with the quantity which his daily wages will

purchase.

    208. The existence of a class of middlemen, between small

producers and merchants, is frequently advantageous to both

parties; and there are certain periods in the history of several

manufactures which naturally call that class of traders into

existence. There are also times when the advantage ceasing, the

custom of employing them also terminates; the middlemen,

especially when numerous, as they sometimes are in retail trades,

enhancing the price without equivalent good. Thus, in the recent

examination by the House of Commons into the state of the coal

trade, it appears that five-sixths of the London public is

supplied by a class of middlemen who are called in the trade

Brass plate coal merchants: these consist principally of

merchants' clerks, gentlemen's servants, and others, who have no

wharfs of their own, but merely give their orders to some true

coal merchant, who sends in the coals from his wharf: the brass

plate coal merchants, of course, receiving a commission for his

agency.

    209. In Italy this system is carried to a great extent

amongst the voituriers, or persons who undertake to convey

travellers. There are some possessed of greater fluency and a

more persuasive manner who frequent the inns where the English

resort, and who, as soon as they have made a bargain for the

conveyance of a traveller, go out amongst their countrymen and

procure some other voiturier to do the job for a considerably

smaller sum, themselves pocketing the difference. A short time

before the day of starting, the contractor appears before his

customer in great distress, regretting his inability to perform

the journey on account of the dangerous illness of a mother or

some relative, and requesting to have his cousin or brother

substituted for him. The English traveller rarely fails to

acquiesce in this change, and often praises the filial piety of

the rogue who has deceived him.



NOTES:



1. Much information for such an enquiry is to be found, for the

particular period to which it refers, in the Report of the

Committee of the House of Commons on Manufacturers' Employment, 2

July, 1830.





Chapter 18



Of Raw Materials



    210. Although the cost of any article may be reduced in its

ultimate analysis to the quantity of labour by which it was

produced; yet it is usual, in a certain state of the manufacture

of most substances, to call them by the term raw material. Thus

iron, when reduced from the ore and rendered malleable, is in a

state fitted for application to a multitude of useful purposes,

and is the raw material out of which most of our tools are made.

In this stage of its manufacture, but a moderate quantity of

labour has been expended on the substance; and it becomes an

interesting subject to trace the various proportions in which raw

material, in this sense of the term, and labour unite to

constitute the value of many of the productions of the arts.

    211. Gold leaf consists of a portion of the metal beaten out

to so great a degree of thinness, as to allow a greenish-blue

light to be transmitted through its pores. About 400 square

inches of this are sold, in the form of a small book containing

25 leaves of gold, for 1s. 6d. In this case, the raw material, or

gold, is worth rather less than two-thirds of the manufactured

article. In the case of silver leaf, the labour considerably

exceeds the value of the material. A book of fifty leaves, which

would cover above 1000 square inches, is sold for 1s. 3d.

    212. We may trace the relative influence of the two causes

above referred to, in the prices of fine gold chains made at

Venice. The sizes of these chains are known by numbers, the

smallest having been (in 1828) No. 1, and the numbers 2, 3, 4,

etc., progressively increasing in size. The following table shows

the numbers and the prices of those made at that time.(1*) The

first column gives the number by which the chain is known; the

second expresses the weight in grains of one inch in length of

each chain; the third column the number of links in the same

length; and the last expresses the price, in francs worth

tenpence each, of a Venetian braccio, or about two English feet

of each chain.



 Venetian gold chains

 Price of a Venetian

 Braccio, equal to

 Weight of Number of links two feet 1/8 inch

 No. one inch, in grains in one inch English

 0.44 98 to 100 60 francs

 1.56 92 40

 1 1/2.77 88 26

 2.99 84 20

 3 1.46 72 20

 4 1.61 64 21

 5 2.09 64 23

 6 2.61 60 24

 7 3.36 56 27

 8 3.65 56 29

 9 3.72 56 32

 10 5.35 50 34

 24 9.71 32 60



    Amongst these chains, that numbered 0 and that numbered 24

are exactly of the same price, although the quantity of gold in

the latter is twenty-two times as much as in the former. The

difficulty of making the smallest chain is so great, that the

women who make it cannot work above two hours at a time. As we

advance from the smaller chain, the proportionate value of the

work to the worth of the material becomes less and less, until at

the numbers 2 and 3, these two elements of cost balance each

other: after which, the difficulty of the work decreases, and the

value of the material increases.

    213. The quantity of labour expended on these chains is,

however, incomparably less than that which is applied in some of

the manufactures of iron. In the case of the smallest Venetian

chain the value of the labour is not above thirty times that of

the gold. The pendulum spring of a watch, which governs the

vibrations of the balance, costs at the retail price two pence,

and weighs fifteen one-hundredths of a grain. whilst the retail

price of a pound of the best iron, the raw material out of which

fifty thousand such springs are made, is exactly the same sum of

two pence.

    214. The comparative price of labour and of raw material

entering into the manufactures of France, has been ascertained

with so much care, in a memoir of M. A. M. Heron de Villefosse,

Recherches statistiques, sur les Metaux de France.(2*) that we

shall give an abstract of his results reduced to English

measures. The facts respecting the metals relate to the year

1825.

    In France the quantity of raw material which can be purchased

for *1, when manufactured into



 Silk goods is worth *2.37

 Broad cloth and woollens 2.15

 Hemp and cables 3.94

 Linen comprising thread laces 5.00

 Cotton goods 2.44



 The price of pig-lead was *1 1s. per cwt; and lead of the value

of *1 sterling, became worth, when manufactured into



 Sheets or pipes of moderate dimensions * 1. 25

 White lead 2.60

 Ordinary printing characters 4.90

 The smallest type 28.30



 The price of copper was *5 2s. per cwt. Copper worth *1 became

when manufactured into



 Copper sheeting *1.26

 Household utensils 4.77

 Common brass pins tinned 2.34

 Rolled into plates covered with 1/20 silver 3.56

 Woven into metallic cloth, each square inch of which contains

10,000 meshes 52.23



    The price of tin was *4 12s. per cwt. Tin worth *1 when

manufactured into



 Leaves for silvering glass became *1.73

 Household utensils 1.85



    Quicksilver cost *10 16s. per cwt. Quicksilver worth *1 when

manufactured into



 Vermilion of average quality became *1.81



    Metallic arsenic cost *1 4s. per cwt. Arsenic worth *1 when

manufactured into



 White oxide of arsenic became *1.83

 Sulphuret (orpiment) 4.26



    The price of cast-iron was 8s. per cwt. Cast-iron worth *1

when manufactured into



 Household utensils became *2.00

 Machinery 4.00

 Ornamental. as buckles. etc 45.00

 Bracelets. figures, buttons. etc. 147.00



    8ar-iron cost *1 6s. per cwt. Bar-iron worth *1 when

manufactured into



 Agricultural instruments became *3.57

 Barrels, musket 9. 10

 Barrels of double-barrel guns. twisted and damasked 238.08

 Blades of penknives 657.14

 razor. cast steel 53.57 sabre, for cavalry. infantry, and

artillery. etc. from 9.25 to 16.07

 of table knives 35.70

 Buckles of polished steel, used as jewellery 896.66

 Clothiers' pins 8.03

 Door-latches and bolts from 4.85 to 8.50

 Files, common 2.55 flat, cast steel 20.44

 Horseshoes 2.55

 Iron, small slit, for nails 1. 10

 Metallic cloth, iron wire, No. 80 96.71

 Needles of various sizes from 17.33 to 70.85

 Reeds for weaving 3-4ths calico 21.87

 Saws (frame) of steel 5. 12

 for wood 14.28

Scissors, finest kind 446.94

 Steel, cast 4.28

 cast, in sheets 6.25

 cemented 2.41

 natural 1.42

 Sword handles, polished steel 972.82

 Tinned iron from 2.04 to 2.34

 Wire, iron from 2. 14 to 10.71



    215. The following is stated by M. de Villefosse to be the

price of bar-iron at the forges of various countries, in January,

l825.



per ton

 * s. d.

 France 26 10 0

 Belgium and Germany 16 14 0

 Sweden and Russia, at Stockholm and St Petersburg 13 13 0

 England, at Cardiff 10 1 0



 The price of the article in 1832 was 5 0 0



    M. De Villefosse states, that in France bar-iron, made as it

usually is with charcoal, costs three times the price of the

cast-iron out of which it is made; whilst in England, where it is

usually made with coke, the cost is only twice the price of

cast-iron.

    216. The present price (l832) of lead in England is *13 per

ton, and the worth of *1 of it manufactured into



 Milled sheet lead becomes l.08



    The present price of cake copper is *84 per ton, and the

worth of *1 of it manufactured into



 Sheet copper becomes *1.11



NOTES:



1. A still finer chain is now manufactured (1832).



2.  Memoires de l'Institut. 1826





Chapter 29



On the Division of Labour



    217. Perhaps the most important principle on which the

economy of a manufacture depends, is the division of labour

amongst the persons who perform the work. The first application

of this principle must have been made in a very early stage of

society., for it must soon have been apparent, that a larger

number of comforts and conveniences could be acquired by each

individual, if one man restricted his occupation to the art of

making bows, another to that of building houses, a third boats,

and so on. This division of labour into trades was not, however,

the result of an opinion that the general riches of the community

would be increased by such an arrangement; but it must have

arisen from the circumstance of each individual so employed

discovering that he himself could thus make a greater profit of

his labour than by pursuing more varied occupations. Society must

have made considerable advances before this principle could have

been carried into the workshop; for it is only in countries which

have attained a high degree of civilization, and in articles in

which there is a great competition amongst the producers, that

the most perfect system of the division of labour is to be

observed. The various principles on which the advantages of this

system depend, have been much the subject of discussion amongst

writers on political economy; but the relative importance of

their influence does not appear, in all cases, to have been

estimated with sufficient precision. It is my intention, in the

first instance, to state shortly those principles, and then to

point out what appears to me to have been omitted by those who

have previously treated the subject.

    218. 1. Of the time required for learning. It will readily be

admitted, that the portion of time occupied in the acquisition of

any art will depend on the difficulty of its execution; and that

the greater the number of distinct processes, the longer will be

the time which the apprentice must employ in acquiring it. Five

or seven years have been adopted, in a great many trades, as the

time considered requisite for a lad to acquire a sufficient

knowledge of his art, and to enable him to repay by his labour,

during the latter portion of his time, the expense incurred by

his master at its commencement. If, however, instead of learning

all the different processes for making a needle, for instance,

his attention be confined to one operation, the portion of time

consumed unprofitably at the commencement of his apprenticeship

will be small, and all the rest of it will be beneficial to his

master: and, consequently, if there be any competition amongst

the masters, the apprentice will be able to make better terms,

and diminish the period of his servitude. Again, the facility of

acquiring skill in a single process, and the early period of life

at which it can be made a source of profit, will induce a greater

number of parents to bring up their children to it; and from this

circumstance also, the number of workmen being increased, the

wages will soon fall.

    219. 2. Of waste of materials in learning. A certain quantity

of material will, in all cases, be consumed unprofitably, or

spoiled by every person who learns an art; and as he applies

himself to each new process, he will waste some of the raw

material, or of the partly manufactured commodity. But if each

man commit this waste in acquiring successively every process,

the quantity of waste will be much greater than if each person

confine his attention to one process; in this view of the

subject, therefore, the division of labour will diminish the

price of production.

    220. 3. Another advantage resulting from the division of

labour is, the saVing of that portion of time which is always

lost in changing from one occupation to another. When the human

hand, or the human head, has been for some time occupied in any

kind of work, it cannot instantly change its employment with full

effect. The muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a

flexibility during their exertion, and those not in action a

stiffness during rest. which renders every change slow and

unequal in the commencement. Long habit also produces in the

muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a much

greater degree than they could support under other circumstances.

A similar result seems to take place in any change of mental

exertion; the attention bestowed on the new subject not being so

perfect at first as it becomes after some exercise.

    221. 4. Change of tools. The employment of different tools in

the successive processes is another cause of the loss of time in

changing from one operation to another. If these tools are

simple, and the change is not frequent, the loss of time is not

considerable; but in many processes of the arts the tools are of

great delicacy, requiring accurate adjustment every time they are

used; and in many cases the time employed in adjusting bears a

large proportion to that employed in using the tool. The

sliding-rest, the dividing and the drilling-engine, are of this

kind; and hence, in manufactories of sufficient extent, it is

found to be good economy to keep one machine constantly employed

in one kind of work: one lathe, for example, having a screw

motion to its sliding-rest along the whole length of its bed, is

kept constantly making cylinders; another, having a motion for

equalizing the velocity of the work at the point at which it

passes the tool, is kept for facing surfaces; whilst a third is

constantly employed in cutting wheels.

    222. 5. Skill acquired by frequent repetition of the same

processes. The constant repetition of the same process

necessarily produces in the workman a degree of excellence and

rapidity in his particular department, which is never possessed

by a person who is obliged to execute many different processes.

This rapidity is still further increased from the circumstance

that most of the operations in factories, where the division of

labour is carried to a considerable extent, are paid for as

piece-work. It is difficult to estimate in numbers the effect of

this cause upon production. In nail-making, Adam Smith has

stated, that it is almost three to one; for, he observes, that a

smith accustomed to make nails, but whose whole business has not

been that of a nailer, can make only from eight hundred to a

thousand per day; whilst a lad who had never exercised any other

trade, can make upwards of two thousand three hundred a day.

    223. In different trades, the economy of production arising

from the last-mentioned cause will necessarily be different. The

case of nail-making is, perhaps, rather an extreme one. It must,

however, be observed, that, in one sense, this is not a permanent

source of advantage; for, though it acts at the commencement of

an establishment, yet every month adds to the skill of the

workmen; and at the end of three or four years they will not be

very far behind those who have never practised any other branch

of their art. Upon an occasion when a large issue of bank-notes

was required, a clerk at the Bank of England signed his name,

consisting of seven letters, including the initial of his

Christian name, five thousand three hundred times during eleven

working hours, besides arranging the notes he had signed in

parcels of fifty each.

    224. 6. The division of labour suggests the contrivance of

tools and machinery to execute its processes. When each

processes, by which any article is produced, is the sole

occupation of one individual, his whole attention being devoted

to a very limited and simple operation, improvements in the form

of his tools, or in the mode of using them, are much more likely

to occur to his mind, than if it were distracted by a greater

variety of circumstances. Such an improvement in the tool is

generally the first step towards a machine. If a piece of metal

is to be cut in a lathe, for example, there is one particular

angle at which the cutting-tool must be held to insure the

cleanest cut; and it is quite natural that the idea of fixing the

tool at that angle should present itself to an intelligent

workman. The necessity of moving the tool slowly, and in a

direction parallel to itself, would suggest the use of a screw,

and thus arises the sliding-rest. It was probably the idea of

mounting a chisel in a frame, to prevent its cutting too deeply,

which gave rise to the common carpenter's plane. In cases where a

blow from a hammer is employed, experience teaches the proper

force required. The transition from the hammer held in the hand

to one mounted upon an axis, and lifted regularly to a certain

height by some mechanical contrivance, requires perhaps a greater

degree of invention than those just instanced; yet it is not

difficult to perceive, that, if the hammer always falls from the

same height, its effect must be always the same.

    225. When each process has been reduced to the use of some

simple tool, the union of all these tools, actuated by one moving

power, constitutes a machine. In contriving tools and simplifying

processes, the operative workmen are, perhaps, most successful;

but it requires far other habits to combine into one machine

these scattered arts. A previous education as a workman in the

peculiar trade, is undoubtedly a valuable preliminary; but in

order to make such combinations with any reasonable expectation

of success, an extensive knowledge of machinery, and the power of

making mechanical drawings, are essentially requisite. These

accomplishments are now much more common than they were

formerly., and their absence was, perhaps, one of the causes of

the multitude of failures in the early history of many of our

manufactures.

    226. Such are the principles usually assigned as the causes

of the advantage resulting from the division of labour. As in the

view I have taken of the question, the most important and

influential cause has been altogether unnoticed, I shall restate

those principles in the words of Adam Smith:



The great increase in the quantity of work, which. in consequence

of the division of labour, the same number of people are capable

of performing, is owing to three different circumstances: first.

to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman;

secondly. to the saving of time. which is commonly lost in

passing from one species of work to another; and, lastly. to the

invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and

abridge labour. and enable one man to do the work of many.



    Now, although all these are important causes, and each has

its influence on the result; yet it appears to me, that any

explanation of the cheapness of manufactured articles, as

consequent upon the division of labour, would be incomplete if

the following principle were omitted to be stated.

    That the master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be

executed into different processes, each requiring different

degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise

quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas, if

the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must

possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and

sufficient strength to execute the most laborious, of the

operations into which the art is divided.(1*)

    227. As the clear apprehension of this principle, upon which

a great part of the economy arising from the division of labour

depends, is of considerable importance, it may be desirable to

point out its precise and numerical application in some specific

manufacture. The art of making needles is, perhaps, that which I

should have selected for this illustration, as comprehending a

very large number of processes remarkably different in their

nature; but the less difficult art of pinmaking, has some claim

to attention, from its having been used by Adam Smith; and I am

confirmed in the choice of it, by the circumstance of our

possessing a very accurate and minute description of that art, as

practised in France above half a century ago.

    228. Pin-making. In the manufacture of pins in England the

following processes are employed:

    1. Wire-drawing. (a) The brass wire used for making pins is

purchased by the manufacturer in coils of about twenty-two inches

in diameter, each weighing about thirty-six pounds. (b) The coils

are wound off into smaller ones of about six inches in diameter,

and between one and two pounds' weight. (c) The diameter of this

wire is now reduced, by drawing it repeatedly through holes in

steel plates, until it becomes of the size required for the sort

of pins intended to be made. During this process the wire is

hardened, and to prevent its breaking, it must be annealed two or

three times, according to the diminution of diameter required.

(d) The coils are then soaked in sulphuric acid, largely diluted

with water, in order to clean them, and are then beaten on stone,

for the purpose of removing any oxidated coating which may adhere

to them. These operations are usually performed by men, who draw

and clean from thirty to thirty-six pounds of wire a day. They

are paid at the rate of five farthings per pound, and generally

earn about 3s. 6d. per day.

    M. Perronnet made some experiments on the extension the wire

undergoes in passing through each hole: he took a piece of thick

Swedish brass wire, and found



 Feet Inches

 Its length to be before drawing 3 8

 After passing the first hole 5 5

 second hole 7 2

 third hole 7 8



 It was now annealed, and the length became



 After passing the fourth hole 10 8

 fifth hole 13 1

 sixth hole 16 8

 And finally, after passing through six other holes 144 0



    The holes through which the wire was drawn were not, in this

experiment, of regularly decreasing diameter: it is extremely

difficult to make such holes, and still more to preserve them in

their original dimensions.

    229. 2. Straightening the wire. The coil of wire now passes

into the hands of a woman, assisted by a boy or girl. A few

nails, or iron pins, not quite in a line, are fixed into one end

of a wooden table about twenty feet in length; the end of the

wire is passed alternately between these nails, and is then

pulled to the other end of the table. The object of this process

is to straighten the wire, which had acquired a considerable

curvature in the small coils in which it had been wound. The

length thus straightened is cut off, and the remainder of the

coil is drawn into similar lengths. About seven nails or pins are

employed in straightening the wire, and their adjustment is a

matter of some nicety. It seems, that by passing the wire between

the first three nails or pins, a bend is produced in an opposite

direction to that which the wire had in the coil; this bend, by

passing the next two nails, is reduced to another less curved. in

the first direction, and so on till the curve of the wire may at

last be confounded with a straight line.

    230. 3. Pointing. (a) A man next takes about three hundred of

these straightened pieces in a parcel, and putting them into a

gauge, cuts off from one end, by means of a pair of shears, moved

by his foot, a portion equal in length to rather more than SiX

pins. He continues this operation until the entire parcel is

reduced into similar pieces. (b) The next step is to sharpen the

ends: for this purpose the operator sits before a steel mill,

which is kept rapidly revolving: it consists of a cylinder about

six inches in diameter, and two and a half inches broad, faced

with steel, which is cut in the manner of a file. Another

cylinder is fixed on the same axis at a few inches distant; the

file on the edge of which is of a finer kind, and is used for

finishing off the points. The workman now takes up a parcel of

the wires between the finger and thumb of each hand, and presses

the ends obliquely on the mill, taking care with his fingers and

thumbs to make each wire slowly revolve upon its axis. Having

thus pointed all the pieces at one end, he reverses them, and

performs the same operation on the other. This process requires

considerable skill, but it is not unhealthy; whilst the similar

process in needlemaking is remarkably destructive of health. (c)

The pieces now pointed at both ends, are next placed in gauges,

and the pointed ends are cut off, by means of shears, to the

proper length of which the pins are to be made. The remaining

portions of the wire are now equal to about four pins in length,

and are again pointed at each end, and their lengths again cut

off. This process is repeated a third time, and the small portion

of wire left in the middle is thrown amongst the waste, to be

melted along with the dust arising from the sharpening. It is

usual for a man, his wife, and a child, to join in performing

these processes; and they are paid at the rate of five farthings

per pound. They can point from thirty-four to thirty-six and a

half pounds per day, and gain from 6s. 6d. to 7s., which may be

apportioned thus; 5s. 6d. the man. 1s. the woman, 6d. to the boy

or girl.

    231. 4. Twisting and cutting the heads. The next process is

making the heads. For this purpose (a) a boy takes a piece of

wire, of the same diameter as the pin to be headed, which he

fixes on an axis that can be made to revolve rapidly by means of

a wheel and strap connected with it. This wire is called the

mould. He then takes a smaller wire, which having passed through

an eye in a small tool held in his left hand, he fixes close to

the bottom of the mould. The mould is now made to revolve rapidly

by means of the right hand, and the smaller wire coils round it

until it has covered the whole length of the mould. The boy now

cuts the end of the spiral connected with the foot of the mould,

and draws it off. (b) When a sufficient quantity of heading is

thus made, a man takes from thirteen to twenty of these spirals

in his left hand, between his thumb and three outer fingers:

these he places in such a manner that two turns of the spiral

shall be beyond the upper edge of a pair of shears, and with the

forefinger of the same hand he feels that only two turns do so

project. With his right hand he closes the shears; and the two

turns of the spiral being cut off, drop into a basin; the

position of the forefinger preventing the heads from flying about

when cut off. The workmen who cut the heads are usually paid at

the rate of 2 1/2d. to 3d. per pound for large heads, but a

higher price is given for the smaller heading. Out of this they

pay the boy who spins the spiral; he receives from 4d. to 6d. a

day. A good workman can cut from six to about thirty pounds of

heading per day, according to its size.

    232. 5. Heading. The process of fixing the head on the body

of the pin is usually executed by women and children. Each

operator sits before a small steel stake, having a cavity, into

which one half of the intended head will fit; immediately above

is a steel die, having a corresponding cavity for the other half

of the head: this latter die can be raised by a pedal moved by

the foot. The weight of the hammer is from seven to ten pounds,

and it falls through a very small space, perhaps from one to two

inches. The cavities in the centre of these dies are connected

with the edge of a small groove, to admit of the body of the pin,

which is thus prevented from being flattened by the blow of the

die. (a) The operator with his left hand dips the pointed end of

the body of a pin into a tray of heads; having passed the point

through one of them, he carries it along to the other end with

the forefinger. He now takes the pin in the right hand, and

places the head in the cavity of the stake, and, lifting the die

with his foot, allows it to fall on the head. This blow tightens

the head on the shank, which is then turned round, and the head

receives three or four blows on different parts of its

circumference. The women and children who fix the heads are paid

at the rate of 1s. 6d. for every twenty thousand. A skilful

operator can with great exertion do twenty thousand per, day. but

from ten to fifteen thousand is the usual quantity: children head

a much smaller number: varying, of course, with the degree of

their skill. About one per cent of the pins are spoiled in the

process; these are picked out afterwards by women, and are

reserved, along with the waste from other processes, for the

melting-pot. The die in which the heads are struck is varied in

form according to the fashion of the time; but the repeated blows

to which it is subject render it necessary that it should be

repaired after it has been used for about thirty pounds of pins.

    233. 6. Tinning. The pins are now fit to be tinned, a process

which is usually executed by a man, assisted by his wife, or by a

lad. The quantity of pins operated upon at this stage is usually

fifty-six pounds. (a) They are first placed in a pickle, in order

to remove any grease or dirt from their surface, and also to

render them rough, which facilitates the adherence of the tin

with which they are to be covered. (b) They are then placed in a

boiler full of a solution of tartar in water, in which they are

mixed with a quantity of tin in small grains. In this they are

generally kept boiling for about two hours and a half, and are

then removed into a tub of water into which some bran has been

thrown, for the purpose of washing off the acid liquor. (c) They

are then taken out, and, being placed in wooden trays, are well

shaken in dry bran: this removes any water adhering to them; and

by giving the wooden tray a peculiar kind of motion, the pins are

thrown up, and the bran gradually flies off, and leaves them

behind in the tray. The man who pickles and tins the pins usually

gets one penny per pound for the work, and employs himself,

during the boiling of one batch of pins, in drying those

previously tinned. He can earn about 9s. per day; but out of this

he pays about 3s. for his assistant.

    234. 7. Papering. The pins come from the tinner in wooden

bowls, with the points projecting in all directions: the

arranging of them side by side in paper is generally performed by

women. (a) A woman takes up some, and places them on a comb, and

shaking them, some of the pins fall back into the bowl, and the

rest, being caught by their heads, are detained between the teeth

of the comb. (b) Having thus arranged them in a parallel

direction, she fixes the requisite number between two pieces of

iron, having twenty-five small grooves, at equal distances; (c)

and having previously doubled the paper, she presses it against

the points of the pins until they have passed through the two

folds which are to retain them. The pins are then relieved from

the grasp of the tool, and the process is repeated. A woman gains

about 1s. 6d. per day by papering; but children are sometimes

employed, who earn from 6d. per day, and upwards.

    235. Having thus generally described the various processes of

pinmaking, and having stated the usual cost of each, it will be

convenient to present a tabular view of the time occupied by each

process, and its cost, as well as the sums which can be earned by

the persons who confine themselves solely to each process. As the

rate of wages is itself fluctuating, and as the prices paid and

quantities executed have been given only between certain limits,

it is not to be expected that this table can represent the cost

of each part of the work with the minutest accuracy, nor even

that it shall accord perfectly with the prices above given: but

it has been drawn up with some care, and will be quite sufficient

to serve as the basis of those reasonings which it is meant to

illustrate. A table nearly similar will be subjoined, which has

been deduced from a statement of M. Perronet, respecting the art

of pin-making in France, above seventy years ago.



 English manufacture



    236. Pins, Elevens, 5546 weigh one pound; one dozen = 6932

pins weigh twenty ounces, and require six ounces of paper.



 Name of the process

 Workman

 Time for making 1 lb of pins Hours

 Cost of making 1 lb of pins Pence

 Workmen earns per day s. d.

 Price of making each part of a single pin. in millionths of a

penny





 1. Drawing wire (224)        Man . 3636 1.2500   3 3  225

 2. Straightening wire ( 225) Woman. 3000. 2840   1 0   51

                              Girl. 3000. 1420   0 6   26

 3. Pointing (226)            Man . 3000 1.7750   5 3  319

 4. Twisting and cutting heads Boy. 0400. 0147   0 4 1/2 3

   (227)                      Man . 0400. 2103   5 4 1/2 38

 5. Heading (228)            woman  4.0000 5.0000   1 3   901

 6 Tinning or whitening       Man . 1071. 6666   6 0   12l

   (229)                    woman . 1071. 3333   3 0    60

 7. Papering (230)          Woman   2.1314 3.1973   1 6   576

                                    7.6892 l2.8732  - -  2320

 Number of persons employed: Men. 4; Women. 4; Children, 2.

Total, 10.



 French manufacture



 237. Cost of 12,000 pins, No. 6, each being eight-tenths of an

English inch in length as they were manufactured in France about

1760; with the cost of each operation: deduced from the

observations and statement of M. Perronet.



 Name of the process

 Time for making twelve thousand pins Hours

 Cost of  making twelve thousand  pins Pence

 Workman usually earns per day Pence

 Expense of tools and materials Pence



 1. Wire                      --   --      --    24.75

 2. Straightening and cutting 1.2. 5     4.5      --

 3. Coarse pointing           1.2. 625  10.0      --

    Turning wheel(2*)         1.2. 875   7.0      --

    Fine Pointing           . 8. 5     9.375    --

    Turning wheel             1.2. 5     4.75     --

    Cutting off pointed ends. 6. 375   7.5      --

 4. Turning spiral          . 5. 125   3.0      --

    Cutting off heads       . 8. 375   5.625    --

    Fuel to anneal ditto      --   --      --   . 125

 5. Heading                 12.0. 333   4.25     --

 6. Tartar for cleaning       --   --      --   . 5

    Tartar for whitening      --   --      --   . 5

 7. Papering                 4.8. 5     2.0      --

    Paper                     --   --      --     1.0

    Wear of tools             --   --      --     2.0

                            24.3  4.708



 The great expense of turning the wheel appears to have arisen

from the person so occupied being unemployed during half his

time, whilst the pointer went to another manufactory



    338. It appears from the analysis we have given of the art of

pinmaking, that it occupies rather more than seven hours and a

half of time, for ten different individuals working in succession

on the same material, to convert it into a pound of pins; and

that the total expense of their labour, each being paid in the

joint ratio of his skill and of the time he is employed, amounts

very nearly to 1s. 1d. But from an examination of the first of

these tables, it appears that the wages earned by the persons

employed vary from 4 1/2d. per day up to 6s., and consequently

the skill which is required for their respective employments may

be measured by those sums. Now it is evident, that if one person

were required to make the whole pound of pins, he must have skill

enough to earn about 5s. 3d. per day, whilst he is pointing the

wires or cutting off the heads from the spiral coils - and 6s.

when he is whitening the pins; which three operations together

would occupy little more than the seventeenth part of his time.

It is also apparent, that during more than one half of his time

he must be earning only 1s. 3d, per day, in putting on the heads;

although his skill, if properly employed. would, in the same

time, produce nearly five times as much. If, therefore, we were

to employ, for all the processes, the man who whitens the pins,

and who earns 6s. per day, even supposing that he could make the

pound of pins in an equally short time, yet we must pay him for

his time 46. 14 pence, or about 3s. 10d. The pins would therefore

cost, in making, three times and three quarters as much as they

now do by the application of the division of labour.

    The higher the skill required of the workman in any one

process of a manufacture, and the smaller the time during which


it is employed, so much the greater will be the advantage of

separating that process from the rest, and devoting one person's

attention entirely to it. Had we selected the art of

needle-making as our illustration, the economy arising from the

division of labour would have been still more striking; for the

process of tempering the needles requires great skill, attention,

and experience, and although from three to four thousand are

tempered at once, the workman is paid a very high rate of wages.

In another process of the same manufacture, dry-pointing, which

also is executed with great rapidity, the wages earned by the

workman reach from 7s. to 12s., 15s., and even, in some

instances, to 20s. per day; whilst other processes are carried on

by children paid at the rate of 6d. per day.

    239. Some further reflections suggested by the preceding

analysis, will be reserved until we have placed before the reader

a brief description of a machine for making pins, invented by an

American. It is highly ingenious in point of contrivance, and, in

respect to its economical principles, will furnish a strong and

interesting contrast with the manufacture of pins by the human

hand. In this machine a coil of brass wire is placed on an axis;

one end of this wire is drawn by a pair of rollers through a

small hole in a plate of steel, and is held there by a forceps.

As soon as the machine is put in action -

    1. The forceps draws the wire on to a distance equal in

length to one pin: a cutting edge of steel then descends close to

the hole through which the wire entered, and severs the piece

drawn out.

    2. The forceps holding the piece thus separated moves on,

till it brings the wire to the centre of the chuck of a small

lathe, which opens to receive it. Whilst the forceps is returning

to fetch another piece of wire, the lathe revolves rapidly, and

grinds the projecting end of the wire upon a steel mill, which

advances towards it.

    3. After this first or coarse pointing, the lathe stops, and

another forceps takes hold of the half-pointed pin, (which is

instantly released by the opening of the chuck), and conveys it

to a similar chuck of an adjacent lathe, which receives it, and

finishes the pointing on a finer steel mill.

    4. This mill again stops, and another forceps removes the

pointed pin into a pair of strong steel clams, having a small

groove in them by which they hold the pin very firmly. A part of

this groove, which terminates at that edge of the steel clams

which is intended to form the head of the pin, is made conical. A

small round steel punch is now driven forcibly against the end of

the wire thus clamped, and the head of the pin is partially

formed by compressing the wire into the conical cavity.



NOTES:



1. I have already stated that this principle presented itself to

me after a personal examination of a number of manufactories and

workshops devoted to different purposes; but I have since found

that it had been distinctly pointed out. in the work of Gioja.

Nuovo Prospetto delle Scienze Economiche. 6 tom. 4to. Milano,

1815, tom. i. capo iv.



2. The great expense of turning the wheel appears to have arisen

from the person so occupied being unemployed during half his

time, whilst the pointer went to another manufactory.





Chapter 20



On the Division of Labour



    241. We have already mentioned what may, perhaps, appear

paradoxical to some of our readers that the division of labour

can be applied with equal success to mental as to mechanical

operations, and that it ensures in both the same economy of time.

A short account of its practical application, in the most

extensive series of calculations ever executed, will offer an

interesting illustration of this fact, whilst at the same time it

will afford an occasion for showing that the arrangements which

ought to regulate the interior economy of a manufactory, are

founded on principles of deeper root than may have been supposed,


and are capable of being usefully employed in preparing the road

to some of the sublimest investigations of the human mind.

    242. In the midst of that excitement which accompanied the

Revolution of France and the succeeding wars, the ambition of the

nation, unexhausted by its fatal passion for military renown, was

at the same time directed to some of the nobler and more

permanent triumphs which mark the era of a people's greatness and

which receive the applause of posterity long after their

conquests have been wrested from them, or even when their

existence as a nation may be told only by the page of history.

Amongst their enterprises of science, the French Government was

desirous of producing a series of mathematical tables, to

facilitate the application of the decimal system which they had

so recently adopted. They directed, therefore, their

mathematicians to construct such tables, on the most extensive

scale. Their most distinguished philosophers, responding fully to

the call of their country, invented new methods for this

laborious task; and a work, completely answering the large

demands of the Government, was produced in a remarkably short

period of time. M. Prony, to whom the superintendence of this

great undertaking was confided, in speaking of its commencement,

observes: Je m'y livrai avec toute l'ardeur dont j'etois capable,

et je m'occupai d'abord du plan general de l'execution. Toutes

les conditions que j'avois a remplir necessitoient l'emploi d'un

grand nombre de calculateurs; et il me vint bientot a la pensee

d'appliquer a la connection de ces Tables la division du travail,

dont les Arts de Commerce tirent un parti si avantageux pour

reunir a la pernection de main-d'oeuvre l'economie de la depense

et du temps. The circumstance which gave rise to this singular

application of the principle of the division on labour is so

interesting, that no apology is necessary for introducing it from

a small pamphlet printed at Paris a few years since, when a

proposition was made by the English to the French Government,

that the two countries should print these tables at their joint

expense.

    243. The origin of the idea is related in the following

extract:

    C'est a un chapitre d'un ouvrage Anglais,(1*) justement

celebre, (I.) qu'est probablement due l'existence de l'ouvrage

dont le gouvernement Britannique veut faire jouir le monde

savant:

    Voici l'anecdote: M. de Prony s'etait engage. avec les

comites de gouvernement. a composer pour la division centesimale

du cercle, des tables logarithmiques et trigonometriques, qui,

non seulement ne laissassent rien a desirer quant a l'exactitude,

mais qui formassent le monument de calcul 1e plus vaste et le

plus imposant qui eut jamais ete execute, ou meme concu. Les

logarithmes des nombres de 1 a 200.000 formaient a ce travail un

supplement necessaire et exige. Il fut aise a M. de Prony de

s'assurer que meme en s'associant trois ou quatre habiles

co-operateurs. la plus grande duree presumable de sa vie ne lui

sufirai pas pour remplir ses engagements. Il etait occupe de

cette facheuse pensee lorsque. se trouvant devant la boutique

d'un marchand de livres. il appercut la belle edition Anglaise de

Smith, donnee a Londres en 1776: il ouvrit le livre au hazard. et

tomba sur le premier chapitre, qui traite de la division du

travail, et ou la fabrication des epingles est citee pour

exemple. A peine avait-il parcouru les premieres pages, que, par

une espece d'inspiration. il concut l'expedient de mettre ses

logarithmes en manufacture comme les epingles. Il faisait en ce

moment, a l'ecole polytechnique, des lecons sur une partie

d'analyse liee a ce genre de travail, la methode des differences,

et ses applications a 1'interpolation. Il alla passer quelques

jours a la campagne. et revint a Paris avec le plan de

fabrication. qui a ete suivi dans l'execution. Il rassembla deux

ateliers. qui faisai.ent separement les memes calculs, et se

servaient de verification reciproque.(2*)

    244. The ancient methods of computing tables were altogether

inapplicable to such a proceeding. M. Prony, therefore, wishing

to avail himself of all the talent of his country in devising new

methods, formed the first section of those who were to take part

in this enterprise out of five or six of the most eminent

mathematicians in France.

    First section. The duty of this first section was to

investigate, amongst the various analytical expressions which

could be found for the same function, that which was most readily

adapted to simple numerical calculation by many individuals

employed at the same time. This section had little or nothing to

do with the actual numerical work. When its labours were

concluded, the formulae on the use of which it had decided, were

delivered to the second section.

    Second section. This section consisted of seven or eight

persons of considerable acquaintance with mathematics: and their

duty was to convert into numbers the formulae put into their

hands by the first section an operation of great labour; and then

to deliver out these formulae to the members of the third

section, and receive from them the finished calculations. The

members of this second section had certain means of verifying the

calculations without the necessity of repeating, or even of

examining, the whole of the work done by the third section.

    Third section. The members of this section, whose number

varied from sixty to eighty, received certain numbers from the

second section, and, using nothing more than simple addition and

subtraction, they returned to that section the tables in a

finished state. It is remarkable that nine-tenths of this class

had no knowledge of arithmetic beyond the two first rules which

they were thus called upon to exercise, and that these persons

were usually found more correct in their calculations, than those

who possessed a more extensive knowledge of the subject.

    245. When it is stated that the tables thus computed occupy

seventeen large folio volumes, some idea may perhaps be formed of

the labour. From that part executed by the third class, which may

almost be termed mechanical, requiring the least knowledge and by

far the greatest exertions, the first class were entirely exempt.

Such labour can always be purchased at an easy rate. The duties

of the second class, although requiring considerable skill in

arithmetical operations, were yet in some measure relieved by the

higher interest naturally felt in those more difficult

operations. The exertions of the first class are not likely to

require, upon another occasion, so much skill and labour as they

did upon the first attempt to introduce such a method; but when

the completion of a calculating engine shall have produced a

substitute for the whole of the third section of computers, the

attention of analysts will naturally be directed to simplifying

its application, by a new discussion of the methods of converting

analytical formulae into numbers.

    246. The proceeding of M. Prony, in this celebrated system of

calculation, much resembles that of a skilful person about to

construct a cotton or silk mill, or any similar establishment.

Having, by his own genius, or through the aid of his friends,

found that some improved machinery may be successfully applied to

his pursuit, he makes drawings of his plans of the machinery, and

may himself be considered as constituting the first section. He

next requires the assistance of operative engineers capable of

executing the machinery he has designed, some of whom should

understand the nature of the processes to be carried on; and

these constitute his second section. When a sufficient number of

machines have been made, a multitude of other persons, possessed

of a lower degree of skill, must be employed in using them; these

form the third section: but their work, and the just performance

of the machines, must be still superintended by the second class.

    247. As the possibility of performing arithmetical

calculations by machinery may appear to non-mathematical readers

to be rather too large a postulate, and as it is connected with

the subject of the division of labour, I shall here endeavour, in

a few lines, to give some slight perception of the manner in

which this can be done - and thus to remove a small portion of

the veil which covers that apparent mystery.

    248. That nearly all tables of numbers which follow any law,

however complicated, may be formed, to a greater or less extent,

solely by the proper arrangement of the successive addition and

subtraction of numbers befitting each table, is a general

principle which can be demonstrated to those only who are well

acquainted with mathematics; but the mind, even of the reader who

is but very slightly acquainted with that science, will readily

conceive that it is not impossible, by attending to the following

example.

    The subjoined table is the beginning of one in very extensive

use, which has been printed and reprinted very frequently in many

countries, and is called a table of square numbers.





Terms of Table  A Table  B first Difference  C second Difference



        1           1

                                3

        2           4                           2

                                5

        3           9                           2

                                7

        4          16                           2

                                9

        5          25                           2

                               11

        6          36                           2

                               13

        7          49



    Any number in the table, column A, may be obtained, by

multiplying the number which expresses the distance of that term

from the commencement of the table by itself; thus, 25 is the

fifth term from the beginning of the table, and 5 multiplied by

itself, or by 5, is equal to 25. Let us now subtract each term of

this table from the next succeeding term, and place the results

in another column (B), which may be called first difference

column. If we again subtract each term of this first difference

from the succeeding term, we find the result is always the number

2, (column C); and that the same number will always recur in that

column, which may be called the second difference, will appear to

any person who takes the trouble to carry on the table a few

terms further. Now when once this is admitted, it is quite clear

that, provided the first term (1) of the table, the first term

(3) of the first differences, and the first term (2) of the

second or constant difference, are originally given, we can

continue the table of square numbers to any extent, merely by

addition: for the series of first differences may be formed by

repeatedly adding the constant difference (2) to (3) the first

number in column B, and we then have the series of numbers, 3, 5,

6, etc.: and again, by successively adding each of these to the

first number (1) of the table, we produce the square numbers.

    249. Having thus, I hope, thrown some light upon the

theoretical part of the question, I shall endeavour to show that

the mechanical execution of such an engine, as would produce this

series of numbers, is not so far removed from that of ordinary

machinery as might be conceived.(3*) Let the reader imagine three

clocks, placed on a table side by side, each having only one

hand, and each having a thousand divisions instead of twelve

hours marked on the face; and every time a string is pulled, let

them strike on a bell the numbers of the divisions to which their

hands point. Let him further suppose that two of the clocks, for

the sake of distinction called B and C, have some mechanism by

which the clock C advances the hand of the clock B one division,

for each stroke it makes upon its own bell: and let the clock B

by a similar contrivance advance the hand of the clock A one

division, for each stroke it makes on its own bell. With such an

arrangement, having set the hand of the clock A to the division

I, that of B to III, and that of C to II, let the reader imagine

the repeating parts of the clocks to be set in motion continually

in the following order: viz. - pull the string of clock A; pull

the string of clock B; pull the string of clock C.

    The table on the following page will then express the series

of movements and their results.

    If now only those divisions struck or pointed at by the clock

A be attended to and written down, it will be found that they

produce the series of the squares of the natural numbers. Such a

series could, of course, be carried by this mechanism only so far

as the numbers which can be expressed by three figures; but this

may be sufficient to give some idea of the construction - and

was, in fact, the point to which the first model of the

calculating engine, now in progress, extended.

    250. We have seen, then, that the effect of the division of

labour, both in mechanical and in mental operations, is, that it

enables us to purchase and apply to each process precisely that

quantity of skill and knowledge which is required for it: we

avoid employing any part of the time of a man who can get eight

or ten shillings a day by his skill in tempering needles, in

turning a wheel, which can be done for sixpence a day; and we

equally avoid the loss arising from the employment of an

accomplished mathematician in performing the lowest processes of

arithmetic.

    251. The division of labour cannot be successfully practised

unless there exists a great demand for its produce; and it

requires a large capital to be employed in those arts in which it

is used. In watchmaking it has been carried, perhaps, to the

greatest extent. It was stated in evidence before a committee of

the House of Commons, that there are a hundred and two distinct

branches of this art, to each of which a boy may be put

apprentice: and that he only learns his master's department, and

is unable, after his apprenticeship has expired, without

subsequent instruction, to work at any other branch. The

watch-finisher, whose business is to put together the scattered

parts, is the only one, out of the hundred and two persons, who

can work in any other department than his own.

    252. In one of the most difficult arts, that of mining, great

improvements have resulted from the judicious distribution of the

duties; and under the arrangments which have gradually been

introduced, the whole system of the mine and its government is

now placed under the control of the following officers.



    1. A manager, who has the general knowledge of all that is to

be done, and who may be assisted by one or more skilful persons.

    2. Underground captains direct the proper mining operations,

and govern the working miners.

    3. The purser and book-keeper manage the accounts.

    4. The engineer erects the engines, and superintends the men

who work them.

    5. A chief pitman has charge of the pumps and the apparatus

of the shafts.

    6. A surface-captain, with assistants, receives the ores

raised, and directs the dressing department, the object of which

is to render them marketable.

    7. The head carpenter superintends many constructions.

    8. The foreman of the smiths regulates the ironwork and

tools.

    9. A materials man selects, purchases, receives and delivers

all articles required.

    10. The roper has charge of ropes and cordage of all sorts.



Notes:



1. An Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of

Nations, by Adam Smith.



2. Note sur la publication, proposee par le gouvernement Anglais

des grandes tables logarithmiques et trigonometriques de M de

Prony De l'imprimerie de F. Didot, December 1, 1829, p. 7



3. Since the publication of the second edition of this work, one

portion of the engine which I have been constructing for some

years past has been put together. It calculates, in three

columns, a table with its first and second differences. Each

column can be expressed as far as five figures, so that these

fifteen figures constitute about one ninth part of the larger

engine. The ease and precision with which it works. leave no room

to doubt its success in the more extended form. Besides tables of

squares, cubes, and portions of logarithmic tables, it possesses

the power of calculating certain series whose differences are not

constant; and it has already tabulated parts of series formed

from the following equations:



The third differential of ux = units figur of delta ux



The third differential of ux = nearest whole no. to (1/10,000

delta ux)



The subjoined is one amongst the series which it has calculated:



     0   3,486       42,972

     0   4,991       50,532

     1   6,907       58,813

    14   9,295       67,826

    70  12,236       77,602

   230  15,741       88,202

   495  19,861       99,627

   916  24,597      111,928

 1,504  30,010      125,116

 2,340  36,131      139,272



The general term of this is,



    ux = (x(x-1)(x-2))/(1 X 2 X 3) + the whole number in x/10 +

10 Sigma^3 (units figure of (x(x-1)/2)





Chapter 21



On the Cost of Each Separate Process in a Manufacture



    253. The great competition introduced by machinery, and the

application of the principle of the subdivision of labour, render

it necessary for each producer to be continually on the watch, to

discover improved methods by which the cost of the article he

manufactures may be reduced; and, with this view, it is of great

importance to know the precise expense of every process, as well

as of the wear and tear of machinery which is due to it. The same

information is desirable for those by whom the manufactured goods

are distributed and sold; because it enables them to give

reasonable answers or explanations to the objections of

enquirers, and also affords them a better chance of suggesting to

the manufacturer changes in the fashion of his goods, which may

be suitable either to the tastes or to the finances of his

customers. To the statesman such knowledge is still more

important; for without it he must trust entirely to others, and

can form no judgement worthy of confidence, of the effect any tax

may produce, or of the injury the manufacturer or the country may

suffer by its imposition.

    254. One of the first advantages which suggests itself as

likely to arise from a correct analysis of the expense of the

several processes of any manufacture, is the indication which it

would furnish of the course in which improvement should be

directed. If a method could be contrived of diminishing by one

fourth the time required for fixing on the heads of pins, the

expense of making them would be reduced about thirteen per cent;

whilst a reduction of one half the time employed in spinning the

coil of wire out of which the heads are cut, would scarcely make

any sensible difference. in the cost of manufacturing of the

whole article. It is therefore obvious, that the attention would

be much more advantageously directed to shortening the former

than the latter process.

    255. The expense of manufacturing, in a country where

machinery is of the rudest kind, and manual labour is very cheap,

is curiously exhibited in the price of cotton cloth in the island

of Java. The cotton, in the seed, is sold by the picul, which is

a weight of about 133 lbs. Not above one fourth or one fifth of

this weight, however, is cotton: the natives, by means of rude

wooden rollers, can only separate about 1 1/4 lb. of cotton from

the seed by one day's labour. A picul of cleansed cotton,

therefore, is worth between four and five times the cost of the

impure article; and the prices of the same substance, in its

different stages of manufacture, are - for one picul:



 Dollars Cotton in the seed 2 to 3

 Clean cotton 10 to 11

 Cotton thread 24

 Cotton thread dyed blue 35

 Good ordinary cotton cloth 50



    Thus it appears that the expense of spinning in Java is 117

per cent on the value of the raw material; the expense of dying

thread blue is 45 per cent on its value; and that of weaving

cotton thread into cloth 117 per cent on its value. The expense

of spinning cotton into a fine thread is, in England, about 33

per cent. (1*)

    256. As an example of the cost of the different processes of

a manufacture, perhaps an analytical statement of the expense of

the volume now in the reader's hands may not be uninteresting;

more especially as it will afford an insight into the nature and

extent of the taxes upon literature. It is found economical to

print it upon paper of a very large size, so that although

thirty-two pages, instead of sixteen, are really contained in

each sheet, this work iS still called octavo.



                                        * s. d.



 To printer, for composing (per sheet of 32 pages) *3 ls. 101/2

sheets 32 0 6 [This relates to the ordinary size of the type used

in the volume.]



 To printer for composing small type, as in extracts and 2 0 3

contents, extra per sheet, 3s. 10d.



 To printer, for composing table work, extra per sheet, 2 17 9

5s. 6d.

 Average charge for corrections, per sheet, *3 2s. 10d. 33 0 0

 Press work, 3000 being printed off, per sheet, *3 10s. 36 15 0

 Paper for 3000, at *1 11s. 6d. per ream, weighing 28 lbs: the

duty on paper at 3d. per lb. amounts to 7s. per ream, so that the

63 reams which are required for the work will cost:



 Paper 77 3 6

 Excise Duty 22 1 0

 Total expense of paper 99 4 6



 Total expense of printing and paper 205 18 0

 Steel-plate for title-page 0 7 6

 Engraving on ditto, Head of Bacon 2 2 0

 Ditto letters 1 1 0

 Total expense of title-page 3 10 6

 Printing title-page, at 6s. per 100 9 0 0

 Paper for ditto, at 1s. 9d. per 100 2 12 6

 Expenses of advertising 40 0 0

 Sundries. 5 0 0



 Total expense in sheets 266 1 0



 Cost of a single copy in sheets; 3052 being printed, including

the overplus 0 1 9

 Extra boarding 0 0 6



 Cost of each copy, boarded(2*) 0 2 3



    257. This analysis requires some explanation. The printer

usually charges for composition by the sheet, supposing the type

to be all of one kind; and as this charge is regulated by the

size of the letter, on which the quantity in a sheet depends,

little dispute can arise after the price is agreed upon. If there

are but few extracts, or other parts of the work, which require

to be printed in smaller type; or if there are many notes, or

several passages in Greek, or in other languages, requiring a

different type, these are considered in the original contract,

and a small additional price per sheet allowed. If there is a

large portion of small type, it is better to have a specific

additional charge for it per sheet. If any work with irregular

lines and many figures, and what the printers call rules, occurs,

it is called table work, and is charged at an advanced price per

sheet. Examples of this are frequent in the present volume. a If

the page consists entirely of figures, as in mathematical tables,

which require very careful correction, the charge for composition

is usually doubled. A few years ago I printed a table of

logarithms, on a large-sized page, which required great

additional labour and care from the readers,(3*) in rendering the

proofs correct, and for which, although new punches were not

required, several new types were prepared, and for which

stereotype plates were cast, costing about *2 per sheet. In this

case *11 per sheet were charged, although ordinary composition,

with the same sized letter, in demy octavo, could have been

executed at thirty-eight shillings per sheet: but as the expense

was ascertained before commencing the work, it gave rise to no

difficulties.

    258. The charge for corrections and alterations is one which,

from the difficulty of measuring them, gives rise to the greatest

inconvenience, and is as disagreeable to the publisher (if he be

the agent between the author and the printer), and to the master

printer or his foreman, as it is to the author himself. If the

author study economy, he should make the whole of his corrections

in the manuscript, and should copy it out fairly: it will then be

printed correctly, and he will have little to pay for

corrections. But it is scarcely possible to judge of the effect

of any passage correctly, without having it set up in type; and

there are few subjects, upon which an author does not find he can

add some details or explanation, when he sees his views in print.

If, therefore, he wish to save his own labour in transcribing,

and to give the last polish to the language, he must be content

to accomplish these objects at an increased expense. If the

printer possess a sufficient stock of type, it will contribute

still more to the convenience of the author to have his whole

work put up in what are technically called slips,(4*) and then to

make all the corrections, and to have as few revises as he can.

The present work was set up in slips, but the corrections have

been unusually large, and the revises frequent.

    259. The press work, or printing off, is charged at a price

agreed upon for each two hundred and fifty sheets; and any broken

number is still considered as two hundred and fifty. When a large

edition is required, the price for two hundred and fifty is

reduced; thus, in the present volume, two hundred and fifty

copies, if printed alone, would have been charged eleven

shillings per sheet, instead of 5s. 10d., the actual charge. The

principle of this mode of charging is good, as it obviates all

disputes; but it is to be regretted that the custom of charging

the same price for any small number as for two hundred and fifty,

is so pertinaciously adhered to, that the workmen will not agree

to any other terms when only twenty or thirty copies are

required, or even when only three or four are wanted for the sake

of some experiment. Perhaps if all numbers above fifty were

charged as two hundred and fifty, and all below as for half two

hundred and fifty, both parties would derive an advantage.

    260. The effect of the excise duty is to render the paper

thin, in order that it may weigh little; but this is counteracted

by the desire of the author to make his book look as thick as

possible, in order that he may charge the public as much as he

decently can; and so on that ground alone the duty is of no

importance. There is, however, another effect of this duty, which

both the public and the author feel; for they pay, not merely the

duty which is charged, but also the profit on that duty, which

the paper-maker requires for the use of additional capital; and

also the profit to the publisher and bookseller on the increased

price of the volume.

    261. The estimated charge for advertisements is, in the

present case, about the usual allowance for such a volume; and,

as it is considered that advertisements in newspapers are the

most effectual, where the smallest pays a duty of 3s. 6d., nearly

one half of the charge of advertising is a tax.

    262. It appears then, that, to an expenditure of *224

necessary to produce the present volume, *42 are added in the

shape of a direct tax. Whether the profits arising from such a

mode of manufacturing will justify such a rate of taxation, can

only be estimated when the returns from the volume are

considered, a subject that will be discussed in a subsequent

chapter.(5*) It is at present sufficient to observe, that the tax

on advertisements is an impolitic tax when contrasted with that

upon paper, and on other materials employed. The object of all

advertisements is, by making known articles for sale, to procure

for them a better price, if the sale is to be by auction; or a

larger extent of sale if by retail dealers. Now the more any

article is known, the more quickly it is discovered whether it

contributes to the comfort or advantage of the public; and the

more quickly its consumption is assured if it be found valuable.

It would appear, then, that every tax on communicating

information respecting articles which are the subjects of

taxation in another shape, is one which must reduce the amount

that would have been raised, had no impediment been placed in the

way of making known to the public their qualities and their

price.



NOTES:



1. These facts are taken from Crawford's Indian Archipelago.



2. These charges refer to the edition prepared for the public,

and do not relate to the large paper copies in the hands of some

of the author's friends.



3. Readers are persons employed to correct the press at the

printing office.



4. Slips are long pieces of paper on which sufficient matter is

printed to form, when divided, from two to four pages of text.



5. Chapter 31.



Chapter 22



On the Causes and Consequences of Large Factories



    263. On examining the analysis which has been given in

chapter XIX of the operations in the art of pin-making, it will

be observed, that ten individuals are employed in it, and also

that the time occupied in executing the several processes is very

different. In order, however, to render more simple the reasoning

which follows, it will be convenient to suppose that each of the

seven processes there described requires an equal quantity of

time. This being supposed, it is at once apparent, that, to

conduct an establishment for pin-making most profitably, the

number of persons employed must be a multiple of ten. For if a

person with small means has only sufficient capital to enable him

to employ half that number of persons, they cannot each of them

constantly adhere to the execution of the same process; and if a

manufacturer employs any number not a multiple of ten, a similar

result must ensue with respect to some portion of them. The same

reflection constantly presents itself on examining any

well-arranged factory. In that of Mr Mordan, the patentee of the

ever-pointed pencils, one room is devoted to some of the

processes by which steel pens are manufactured. Six fly-presses

are here constantly at work; in the first a sheet of thin steel

is brought by the workman under the die which at each blow cuts

out a flat piece of the metal, having the form intended for the

pen. Two other workmen are employed in placing these flat pieces

under two other presses, in which a steel chisel cuts the slit.

Three other workmen occupy other presses, in which the pieces so

prepared receive their semi-cylindrical form. The longer time

required for adjusting the small pieces in the two latter

operations renders them less rapid in execution than the first;

so that two workmen are fully occupied in slitting, and three in

bending the flat pieces, which one man can punch out of the sheet

of steel. If, therefore, it were necessary to enlarge this

factory, it is clear that twelve or eighteen presses would be

worked with more economy than any number not a multiple of six.

    The same reasoning extends to every manufacture which is

conducted upon the principle of the division of labour, and we

arrive at this general conclusion: When the number of processes

into which it is most advantageous to divide it, and the number

of individuals to be employed in it, are ascertained, then all

factories which do not employ a direct multiple of this latter

number, will produce the article at a greater cost. This

principle ought always to be kept in view in great

establishments, although it is quite impossible, even with the

best division of the labour, to attend to it rigidly in practice.

The proportionate number of the persons who possess the greatest

skill, is of course to be first attended to. That exact ratio

which is more profitable for a factory employing a hundred

workmen, may not be quite the best where there are five hundred;

and the arrangements of both may probably admit of variations,

without materially increasing the cost of their produce. But it

is quite certain that no individual, nor in the case of

pin-making could any five individuals, ever hope to compete with

an extensive establishment. Hence arises one cause of the great

size of manufacturing establishments, which have increased with

the progress of civilization. Other circumstances, however,

contribute to the same end, and arise also from the same cause -

the division of labour.

    264. The material out of which the manufactured article is

produced, must, in the several stages of its progress, be

conveyed from one operator to the next in succession: this can be

done at least expense when they are all working in the same

establishment. If the weight of the material is considerable,

this reason acts with additional force; but even where it is

light, the danger arising from frequent removal may render it

desirable to have all the processes carried on in the same

building. In the cutting and polishing of glass this is the case;

whilst in the art of needle-making several of the processes are

carried on in the cottages of the workmen. It is, however, clear

that the latter plan, which is attended with some advantages to

the family of the workmen, can be adopted only where there exists

a sure and quick method of knowing that the work has been well

done, and that the whole of the materials given out have been

really employed.

    265. The inducement to contrive machines for any process of

manufacture increases with the demand for the article; and the

introduction of machinery, on the other hand, tends to increase

the quantity produced. and to lead to the establishment of large

factories. An illustration of these principles may be found in

the history of the manufacture of patent net.

    The first machines for weaving this article were very

expensive, costing from a thousand to twelve or thirteen hundred

pounds. The possessor of one of these, though it greatly

increased the quantity he could produce, was nevertheless unable,

when working eight hours a day, to compete with the old methods.

This arose from the large capital invested in the machinery; but

he quickly perceived that with the same expense of fixed capital,

and a small addition to his circulating capital, he could work

the machine during the whole twenty-four hours. The profits thus

realized soon induced other persons to direct their attention to

the improvement of those machines; and the price was greatly

reduced, at the same time that the rapidity of production of the

patent net was increased. But if machines be kept working through

the twenty-four hours, it is necessary that some person shall

attend to admit the workmen at the time they relieve each other;

and whether the porter or other servant so employed admit one

person or twenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It will

also be necessary occasionally to adjust or repair the machine;

and this can be done much better by a workman accustomed to

machine-making, than by the person who uses it. Now, since the

good performance and the duration of machines depend to a very

great extent upon correcting every shake or imperfection in their

parts as soon as they appear, the prompt attention of a workman

resident on the spot will considerably reduce the expenditure

arising from the wear and tear of the machinery. But in the case

of single lace frame, or a single loom, this would be too

expensive a plan. Here then arises another circumstance which

tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It ought to consist of

such a number of machines as shall occupy the whole time of one

workman in keeping them in order: if extended beyond that number,

the same principle of economy would point out the necessity of

doubling or tripling the number of machines, in order to employ

the whole time of two or three skilful workmen.

    266. Where one portion of the workman's labour consists in

the exertion of mere physical force, as in weaving and in many

similar arts, it will soon occur to the manufacturer, that if

that part were executed by a steam-engine, the same man might, in

the case of weaving, attend to two or more looms at once; and,

since we already suppose that one or more operative engineers

have been employed, the number of his looms may be so arranged

that their time shall be fully occupied in keeping the

steam-engine and the looms in order. One of the first results

will be, that the looms can be driven by the engine nearly twice

as fast as before: and as each man, when relieved from bodily

labour, can attend to two looms, one workman can now make almost

as much cloth as four. This increase of producing power is,

however, greater than that which really took place at first; the

velocity of some of the parts of the loom being limited by the

strength of the thread, and the quickness with which it commences

its motion: but an improvement was soon made, by which the motion

commenced slowly, and gradually acquired greater velocity than it

was safe to give it at once; and the speed was thus increased

from 100 to about 120 strokes per minute.

    267. Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes

gradually so enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the

night amounts to a considerable sum; and as there are already

attached to the establishment persons who are up all night, and

can therefore constantly attend to it, and also engineers to make

and keep in repair any machinery, the addition of an apparatus

for making gas to light the factory leads to a new extension, at

the same time that it contributes, by diminishing the expense of

lighting, and the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost

of manufacturing.

    268. Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will

have been found necessary to establish an accountant's

department, with clerks to pay the workmen, and to see that they

arrive at their stated times; and this department must be in

communication with the agents who purchase the raw produce, and

with those who sell the manufactured article.

    269. We have seen that the application of the division of

labour tends to produce cheaper articles; that it thus increases

the demand; and gradually, by the effect of competition, or by

the hope of increased gain, that it causes large capitals to be

embarked in extensive factories. Let us now examine the influence

of this accumulation of capital directed to one object. In the

first place, it enables the most important principle on which the

advantages of the division of labour depends to be carried almost

to its extreme limits: not merely is the precise amount of skill

purchased which is necessary for the execution of each process,

but throughout every stage - from that in which the raw material

is procured, to that by which the finished produce is conveyed

into the hands of the consumer - the same economy of skill

prevails. The quantity of work produced by a given number of

people is greatly augmented by such an extended arrangement; and

the result is necessarily a great reduction in the cost of the

article which is brought to market.

    270. Amongst the causes which tend to the cheap production of

any article, and which are connected with the employment of

additional capital, may be mentioned, the care which is taken to

prevent the absolute waste of any part of the raw material. An

attention to. this circumstance sometimes causes the union of two

trades in one factory, which otherwise might have been separated.

    An enumeration of the arts to which the horns of cattle are

applicable, will furnish a striking example of this kind of

economy. The tanner who has purchased the raw hides, separates

the horns, and sells them to the makers of combs and lanterns.

The horn consists of two parts, an outward horny case, and an

inward conical substance, somewhat intermediate between indurated

hair and bone. The first process consists in separating these two

parts, by means of a blow against a block of wood. The horny

exterior is then cut into three portions with a frame-saw.

    1. The lowest of these, next the root of the horn, after

undergoing several processes, by which it is flattened, is made

into combs.

    2. The middle of the horn, after being flattened by heat, and

having its transparency improved by oil, is split into thin

layers, and forms a substitute for glass, in lanterns of the

commonest kind.

    3. The tip of the horn is used by the makers of knife

handles, and of the tops of whips, and for other similar

purposes.

    4. The interior, or core of the horn, is boiled down in

water. A large quantity of fat rises to the surface; this is put

aside, and sold to the makers of yellow soap.

    5. The liquid itself is used as a kind of glue, and is

purchased by cloth dressers for stiffening.

    6. The insoluble substance, which remains behind, is then

sent to the mill, and, being ground down, is sold to the farmers

for manure.

    7. Besides these various purposes to which the different

parts of the horn are applied, the clippings, which arise in comb

making, are sold to the farmer for manure. In the first year

after they are spread over the soil they have comparatively

little effect, but during the next four or five their efficiency

is considerable. The shavings which form the refuse of the

lantern maker, are of a much thinner texture: some of them are

cut into various figures and painted, and used as toys; for being

hygrometric, they curl up when placed on the palm of a warm hand.

But the greater part of these shavings also are sold for manure,

and from their extremely thin and divided form, the full effect

is produced upon the first crop.

    271. Another event which has arisen, in one trade at least,

from the employment of large capital, is, that a class of

middlemen, formerly interposed between the maker and the

merchant, now no longer exist. When calico was woven in the

cottages of the workmen, there existed a class of persons who

travelled about and purchased the pieces so made, in large

numbers, for the purpose of selling them to the exporting

merchant. But the middlemen were obliged to examine every piece,

in order to know that it was perfect, and of full measure. The

greater number of the workmen, it is true, might be depended

upon, but the fraud of a few would render this examination

indispensable: for any single cottager, though detected by one

purchaser, might still hope that the fact would not become known

to all the rest.

    The value of character, though great in all circumstances of

life, can never be so fully experienced by persons possessed of

small capital, as by those employing much larger sums: whilst

these larger sums of money for which the merchant deals, render

his character for punctuality more studied and known by others.

Thus it happens that high character supplies the place of an

additional portion of capital; and the merchant, in dealing with

the great manufacturer, is saved from the expense of

verification, by knowing that the loss, or even the impeachment,

of the manufacturer's character, would be attended with greater

injury to himself than any profit upon a single transaction could

compensate.

    272. The amount of well-grounded confidence, which exists in

the character of its merchants and manufacturers, is one of the

many advantages that an old manufacturing country always

possesses over its rivals. To such an extent is this confidence

in character carried in England, that, at one of our largest

towns, sales and purchases on a very extensive scale are made

daily in the course of business without any of the parties ever

exchanging a written document.

    273. A breach of confidence of this kind, which might have

been attended with very serious embarrassment, occurred in the

recent expedition to the mouth of the Niger.

    'We brought with us from England,' Mr Lander states, 'nearly

a hundred thousand needles of various sizes, and amongst them was

a great quantity of Whitechapel sharps warranted superfine, and

not to cut in the eye. Thus highly recommended, we imagined that

these needles must have been excellent indeed; but what was our

surprise, some time ago, when a number of them which we had

disposed of were returned to us, with a complaint that they were

all eyeless, thus redeeming with a vengeance the pledge of the

manufacturer, "that they would not cut in the eye". On

examination afterwards, we found the same fault with the

remainder of the "Whitechapel sharps", so that to save our credit

we have been obliged to throw them away.'(1*)

    274. The influence of established character in producing

confidence operated in a very remarkable manner at the time of

the exclusion of British manufactures from the continent during

the last war. One of our largest establishments had been in the

habit of doing extensive business with a house in the centre of

Germany; but, on the closing of the continental ports against our

manufactures, heavy penalties were inflicted on all those who

contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees. The English

manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to receive orders, with

directions how to consign them, and appointments for the time and

mode of payment, in letters, the handwriting of which was known

to him, but which were never signed, except by the christian name

of one of the firm, and even in some. instances they were without

any signature at all. These orders were executed; and in no

instance was there the least irregularity in the payments.

    275. Another circumstance may be noticed, which to a small

extent is more advantageous to large than to small factories. In

the export of several articles of manufacture, a drawback is

allowed by government, of a portion of the duty paid on the

importation of the raw material. In such circumstances, certain

forms must be gone through in order to protect the revenue from

fraud; and a clerk, or one of the partners, must attend at the

custom-house. The agent of the large establishment occupies

nearly the same time in receiving a drawback of several

thousands, as the smaller exporter does of a few shillings. But

if the quantity exported is inconsiderable, the small

manufacturer frequently does not find the drawback will repay him

for the loss of time.

    276. In many of the large establishments of our manufacturing

districts, substances are employed which are the produce of

remote countries, and which are, in several instances, almost

peculiar to a few situations. The discovery of any new locality,

where such articles exist in abundance, is a matter of great

importance to any establishment which consumes them in large

quantities; and it has been found, in some instances, that the

expense of sending persons to great distances, purposely to

discover and to collect such produce, has been amply repaid. Thus

it has happened, that the snowy mountains of Sweden and Norway,

as well as the warmer hills of Corsica, have been almost stripped

of one of their vegetable productions, by agents sent expressly

from one of our largest establishments for the dying of calicos.

Owing to the same command of capital, and to the scale upon which

the operations of large factories are carried on, their returns

admit of the expense of sending out agents to examine into the

wants and tastes of distant countries, as well as of trying

experiments, which, although profitable to them, would be ruinous

to smaller establishments possessing more limited resources.

    These opinions have been so well expressed in the Report of

the Committee of the House of Commons on the Woollen Trade, in

l806, that we shall close this chapter with an extract, in which

the advantages of great factories are summed up.



    Your committee have the satisfaction of seeing, that the

apprehensions entertained of factories are not only vicious in

principle, but they are practically erroneous: to such a degree.

that even the very opposite principles might be reasonably

entertained. Nor would it be difficult to prove, that the

factories, to a certain extent at least, and in the present day,

seem absolutely necessary to the wellbeing of the domestic

system: supplying those very particulars wherein the domestic

system must be acknowledged to be inherently defective: for it is

obvious, that the little master manufacturers cannot afford. like

the man who possesses considerable capital, to try the

experiments which are requisite, and incur the risks, and even

losses, which almost always occur, in inventing and perfecting

new articles of manufacture, or in carrying to a state of greater

perfection articles already established. He cannot learn, by

personal inspection, the wants and habits, the arts,

manufactures, and improvements of foreign countries; diligence,

economy, and prudence, are the requisites of his character, not

invention, taste, and enterprise: nor would he be warranted in

hazarding the loss of any part of his small capital. He walks in

a sure road as long as he treads in the beaten track; but he must

not deviate into the paths of speculation. The owner of a

factory, on the contrary, being commonly possessed of a large

capital, and having all his workmen employed under his own

immediate superintendence, may make experiments, hazard

speculation, invent shorter or better modes of performing old

processes, may introduce new articles, and improve and perfect

old ones, thus giving the range to his taste and fancy, and,

thereby alone enabling our manufacturers to stand the competition

with their commercial rivals in other countries. Meanwhile, as is

well worthy of remark (and experience abundantly warrants the

assertion), many of these new fabrics and inventions, when their

success is once established, become general amongst the whole

body of manufacturers: the domestic manufacturers themselves thus

benefiting, in the end, from those very factories which had been

at first the objects of their jealousy. The history of almost all

our other manufactures, in which great improvements have been

made of late years in some cases at an immense expense, and after

numbers of unsuccessful experiments, strikingly illustrates and

enforces the above remarks. It is besides an acknowledged fact,

that the owners of factories are often amongst the most extensive

purchasers at the halls, where they buy from the domestic

clothier the established articles of manufacture, or are able at

once to answer a great and sudden order; whilst, at home, and

under their own superintendence, they make their fancy goods, and

any articles of a newer, more costly, or more delicate quality,

to which they are enabled by the domestic system to apply a much

larger proportion of their capital. Thus, the two systems,

instead of rivalling, are mutual aids to each other: each

supplying the other's defects, and promoting the other's

prosperity.



Notes:



1. Lander's Journal of an Expedition to the Mouth of the Niger,

vol. ii., p. 42.


